---
layout: post
title: "The Economic View"
description: "One notices, betimes, that there are people who seem to enjoy disenfranchising their fellow humans of everything that makes life worth living..."
---

One notices, betimes, that there are people who seem to enjoy disenfranchising their fellow humans of everything that makes life worth living. Of course it is improper to begin an essay by insulting one’s adversaries, but then again, a petty insult is a thing which verges very closely on humor. Let us call it humor, then, and proceed.

We must first fix on a name for that which we are criticizing. We could call it the utilitarian view, but utilitarianism is too vague and shifting an object to criticize here, though it will be found that our essential point goes a long way toward refuting utilitarianism. We could call it the rational view, but that would be to imply that it is more rational than its alternative. I prefer to call it the economic view.

According to the economic view, all rational action is economic action. Economic action is a hierarchical ordering of ends and means, that one may select among them according to a calculus of self-interest. We decide what is most worth pursuing, what would make us happiest, with the means available and with regard to the future, then we pursue it. All actions are self-interested. All is egoism; there is no altruism. Some people may not mind this, but there are others who do not wish to be selfish. They do not mind if others are selfish, but they do not like having the sort of strait-jacket which is utilitarian selfishness forced over their heads.

The modern solution is to take refuge in emotion, psychology, “sublimated” biochemistry, &c. Love is not self-interested because it is not rational. It is a spontaneous effusion of selflessness winged loftily through atmospheres of illusion, high over the plane of reality. Or it is a gnarly psychological response that predates the existence of man on earth. Or it is a biochemical response “sublimated” mysteriously so as to be exalted. None of these are adequate solutions. Emotion is subjective; and the subjective cannot bring two people together. The subjective is ultimately selfish—we love someone because it makes us feel good. Psychology and biochemistry are also subjective responses. Only reason, which grasps onto the objective, can bring two people together.

According to the economic (utilitarian) view, ethics are selfish. This is true in a sense, because they exist in part for our own good. But according to the traditional view, we are beings with value living in an ordered universe, who ought to act like it. To act like it is to observe ethical law. Utilitarianism though it might flatter our pride by telling us we have value, necessitates the view that, in substance, we do not. Nor do we live in an ordered universe. But it is still in our interest to observe ethical law.

The great fuzzy point in utilitarianism is its teaching with regard to self-interest. It is not always quite clear whether I am to look after my own happiness exclusively, or also others’. Most forms of utilitarianism are logically inconsistent, because they reduce all action to the pursuit of happiness, then expect us to care about the happiness of others. Happiness is subjective, and the only person who cares about a subjective quality is the subject implicated. I only care about someone else’s happiness if I first care about him as an object.

Utilitarianism resolves this problem via its usual laxity with regard to logical consistency. Quite frankly, it matters not whose happiness is at stake for whom—let’s all just be happy and forget about it. Let’s all be reasonable—there’s no time to hate—might as well be happy and make each other happy. That is the attitude of utilitarianism.

Once we admit altruism into utilitarianism, we have set a first foot in the domain of traditional ethics. If it is possible for us to truly love a person, we must want the best for him. We must want him to affirm him, that he may blossom forth in the fullness of his being. But to want that is to begin to apply standards not found in utilitarianism; it is to have illicit dealings with the objective world. The moment we want another person to be all he can in the world, ordering himself according to objective reality and flourishing within that framework, we have made a breach in the fabric of a whole new ethical world. We shall then enter that world for ourselves. It is hard to be altruistic without ceasing to be utilitarian.

Let us stick, then, to utilitarianism proper, and say it is egoistic. Traditional ethics, on the other hand, are altruistic. We owe ethical action to others and to ourselves—and ultimately to God. The two pillars of traditional Christian interpersonal ethics are justice and love. Love acts through justice, and justice is an expression of love. Justice recognizes objective reality. Love recognizes the objective value of personhood. This is perfectly rational, but not according to the economic view.

The economic view is founded on a certain perspective on human reason. The idea is that the rational is the economic—rational action is egoistic, as the function of reason, the only possible function of reason, is to maximize pleasure and minimize pain. But that is not, logically speaking, true. Actually, there are two functions of reason. The other is to apprehend the nature of objective reality, that we may order ourselves according to it. And this is where altruistic action becomes possible.

The economic view does not exactly dismiss this second function of reason. To do so would be to dismiss reason itself. But utilitarianism fails to apprehend the nature of objective reality, and thus gives undue weight to the first type of reason. It does not realize that man is a valuable being living in a moral universe.

Utilitarianism also does not realize that man has an innate desire for meaning, which causes him to strive toward it. Thus man is a religious being. His reason does not need to be tidy and complete. It may be the mere roots of a vital stem that reaches up to flower in the heavens. Utilitarianism cannot keep man down, though it weigh upon him with all the force of fallacy.

Utilitarianism sets the limits of objective reality very close. Traditional ethics expand them. Christian ethics radically affirm the value of every human being, on the supposition that it is objective. A human being is not something to be taken lightly. Utilitarianism asks, “What does it matter what I do in my spare time? What does it matter what anyone does, so long as no one is adversely affected against his will?” Christianity responds that it matters only because the people concerned matter. Man is not a doll to be tossed about by the winds of circumstance and the rending forces of his own passions. He is better than that. He is a moral being, a being with dignity, capable of discerning the order of things, and observing the laws of conduct set forth by that order. This is what I mean when I say there are people who want to wrench from man everything that gives his life unique value.

Man is ethical because he is not irresponsible. He does not set himself up in defiance of pre-established order. But Christian ethics are rooted in love, so we must examine this. Love is an ordering of self according to the objective reality of the value of personhood—or, more properly, personality. The individual person is valuable as an individual, by mere virtue of personhood—thus we are to love our neighbors, indiscriminately you might say, as ourselves. Without bringing God into it (who is also owed this love, but the reality of whom would make the economic view wax pale in an instant), we can say that general love of neighbor—love rooted in objective reality, not emotion, not sentimentalism—does not exclude a more particular form of love. Love of family, husband or wife, children, as well as friendship, is founded on the particularity of relationship and on choice. In the case of husband or wife, of course we choose our spouse, and in the case of family or friends, we choose to love.

Choice in love is generally rational, since those we choose to love are those whom we know best in the world, and we tend to love them all the more the more worthy they are of it. Love of husband or wife is rational, since it takes the form of a vow. A vow presupposes that the person making the vow is the same who will later keep it. Thus it presupposes continuity of personhood, which is an essential element of value and freedom, and, I would contend, objectively true.

At any rate, love is an affirmation of objective value, and thus not irrational, merely emotional, merely psychological, merely biochemical, but perfectly rational as well as consensual. The consensual element is a consent to the objective world, and is rational. Such consent is necessary to live a moral life generally—it is a decision not to overthrow the eternal scheme of things.

Christian ethics are founded on love, often love operating through duty. Duty is a response to the objective reality of the world. Love is a response to the objective value of personhood. Love can bring two persons together by means of reason and choice as well as sentiment and other attractions. The economic view, which asserts the centrality of individual choice based on a calculus of pleasure and pain, is false. Reason and volition are the foundations of altruism—besides whatever truly “divine spark” may, in the Christian view, light up man’s soul.

We might grant this much: there is a desire in man of acting according to reason, according to objective reality. Thus it would make us unhappy not to do our duty, but only because we know we ought to do it. And similarly, if we love a person that person makes us happy—but only because we love him. Thus the calculus of pleasure and pain, the economic or utilitarian considerations, succeed the rational or ethical considerations. The self is effaced, and only finds expression in its reaction to the determinations of reason and the choice of will.
