---
layout: post
title: "Helpless Man Awash in Psychology"
description: "Remarkable as it is, we moderns have a dangerous tendency of supposing that the entire universe is conspiring to hoodwink us into seeing what is not there, and not seeing what is..."
---

Remarkable as it is, we moderns have a dangerous tendency of supposing that the entire universe is conspiring to hoodwink us into seeing what is not there, and not seeing what is. Many of us will say that we are so hopelessly conditioned by our psychology that we are unable to discern even the most basic truths. Thus we see that it is the greatest intellectual swindle of all time, the idea that modernity is the “age of reason.” On the contrary, not only do we care much less for the conclusions of reason, care much less about walking according to the light of truth—the modern age being rather distinguished by the justification and feasible expression of _feelings_—but we have much less faith than our Christian ancestors in our capacity to describe being in rational terms. The Middle Ages were the true age of reason.

This is a vast topic, but I can afford to give one example of a case in which our predispositions supposedly bias us with regard to truth. Our affections are often shaped by political affinity. We are prejudiced against those with whom we disagree politically, and in favor of those with whom we agree.

Personal relations are too complicated to describe without shrewd insight. Yet some persist in offering advice. For instance, we are told, “You ought not to let politics get in the way of personal relationships.” But it seems apparent that politics cannot get in the way of personal relationships, for the very reason that they are personal. Because they are personal, they are inevitably complex on a personal plane, and mere politics is never the whole reason for their collapse. It might be judicious to avoid politics after dinner, and make allowance for political differences. But to say that all the complex issues concerned in a personal “falling out” are a mere matter of politics, I think is apparently false to anyone who has known his fellow human beings and himself. It is better for political pundits to offer political wisdom, and leave superficial personal counseling to the personal counselors.

But certainly one’s disposition toward a public figure is conditioned by politics. For instance, one might love Barack Obama, and despise Donald Trump, then come to agree with Trump’s politics, and flip-flop regarding the two. Certainly it is possible to agree with a person’s politics, and dislike him nevertheless. It is so with many with President Trump. And no doubt one may be blinded to a politician’s personal flaws by political agreement. But it is also a question of truth. If one adores Obama, it is partly because one perceives him as a tireless and charismatic fighter for the oppressed. When one realizes he is no such thing, and discovers he is instead driven by an ego grossly distended, and switches parties, and realizes Donald Trump is, in fact, a tireless fighter for the American people, with many of the right motivations, it is inevitable that, having realized the error of one’s ways, one will come to prefer Trump to Obama. Truth is important, and when one perceives a person to be telling the truth, then discovers he is lying, is it surprising that one changes one’s view of him? And vice versa. Trump the liar is a very different thing from Trump the truth-teller. And Obama the truth-teller is not Obama the lying narcissist.

One was blinded to Obama’s true character in part because one thought he was telling the truth. One may tell falsehoods because one is ignorant, self-deceived, or lying. If one may be self-deceived, we must admit that there is often an element of virtue in our conclusions about what is true.

It is a chagrining experience to discover that one was wrong about the truth, and inevitably causes one to rethink the character of those with whom one had formerly agreed. It is so when one finds oneself leaving the party of abortion and cultural degeneracy for a better party, with a man who has been hated, yet has fought on. It is not a question of psychology or predispositions, it is a question of truth. When a person awakes from blindness, he can admit he was blind, but that implies that his eyes are open now. He sees things in a truer light. But we ourselves our blinded to this by our habit of thinking of truth as a mere color shading one of two different equal alternatives. True knowledge is opinion no less than opinion, not elevated above it.

It is impossible to speak of these matters without reference to one’s own opinion, because truth is always decisive. The Devil is the Father of Lies; God is good; and we can expect to see this division mirrored on earth. For truth is important. All who speak lies are not evil, nor are all who speak truth good, but to imply that truth is a mere incident quality is to pitch a lie oneself.

We moderns have a habit of thinking that all opinions are in some way legitimate. But the framework of competing opinions has failed us, and is false. It is better to remember that one may be in error, but this does not make error universal. Modern man likes to universalize his error. Many will be mistaken about many things, but not everyone. Truth, surely, is to be found somewhere.
