---
layout: post
title: "On the Division of Truth"
description: "We are beset by false ideas on every hand..."
---

We are beset by false ideas on every hand. But there is nothing more insidious than a false idea that, while being on the surface benevolent and harmless, reveals profound error in the very structure of thought of which it is a part. Any idea can be maneuvered into the appearance of innocence, but fundamental ideas ought to be correct.

There is a form of intellectual agnosticism common among university professors on the liberal left, which consists of granting truth liberally to all parties or ideas. It is said that every party has a portion of the truth, and that no idea is entirely wrong. Therefore we ought to grant concessions to virtually every party and the votaries of virtually every idea.

It is notable that this generosity is not usually extended with equal beneficence to all parties. Thus hateful movements on the right, or ostensibly so, (fascism, Nazism) are condemned entirely, whereas hateful movements on the left are adorned with excuses. Perhaps the evils of past Communism are admitted, but never of present Communism. But that is a personal weakness, and has no bearing on our discussion. It does show one thing, that generosity toward a party is usually accompanied by sympathy with its objectives. There is a fundamental sympathy among the left, which renders the moderates impotent before the radicals. Every party sells ideas to some extent. Liberals will always prefer leftist ideas to the most reasonable ideas on the right, and if it comes to it, they will found a new party, even in the face of crisis and revolution. Thus Brett Weinstein and the “Unity Party.”

Granted, immediately, that there is truth even in error, and thus in all ideas. Factual error is sometimes occasion for near absolute error on the part of a party. The actual statistics of black men being wantonly killed by white police officers show the left has nothing to say. Also, there is less leisure for equivocation in politics than in state-subsidized universities. The issues to be resolved involve concrete action in the present. And some present actions may be disastrous in consequence. There is some truth in “Bomb Russia!” but not enough to save the proposer from the asylum.

It has long been recognized that there is truth even in error. The Devil is the Father of Lies, and as such the Father of Half-Truths. There is truth in Marxism—for class war is a real phenomenon, and so forth. There is truth even in the most patently absurd of leftist doctrines. No one denies the existence of “micro-aggressions.” People offend people on the basis of race, &c., &c., &c. But over-sensitivity is a poor preparation for the world. Micro-aggressions fall squarely in the realm of personal self-correction and social relations, and are none of anybody’s business but the parties directly concerned. Words should not be coined to express negligible realities with political motivation. And so on, and so forth. There is not much truth in the idea of systemic racism as it is sometimes conceived, but a heritage of under-privilege from slavery certainly exists. Black people are oppressed. But on the other hand, as Dr. Jordan Peterson would say, we’re all oppressed. It is no solution to anything to whine about it and demand government interference. It is logically and technically impossible to solve extra-legal racial disparities with conscious legal or personal racial discrimination. Attempts to raise up black communities with exterior force have worsened the problem. And so on, and so forth.

There is truth in the idea of the “social construct.” But man does have a nature; man ought to be civilized; man is endowed with reason, to apprehend his role in the world; &c. There is truth in the idea that man is a slice of bread (both contain high quantities of carbon), but the idea is not useful, not to be taken seriously, and if it gains great traction, ought to be fiercely resisted.

Truth may have error in it, yet indeed be very erroneous, even evil. After all, the Devil is the Father of Half-Truths. And self-doubt may be occasioned by too much willingness to grant truth where it is not due. One ought not to equivocate. Nor ought one to “lend a lie the confidence of truth.” There is a certain inherent confidence in truth that is easily undermined. Dreadfully wrong ideas should not be given legitimacy.

Nor should one assume one’s opponents always have the best intentions. It is not obvious why people like Nancy Pelosi lie _ex cathedra_. It is not obvious why journalists are unscrupulous. Nor is it why the Democrat party is a factory of lies. It is not obvious why politicians do as they do. But it becomes clearer when we realize they are lying and they know it.

That which is good in the ideas of our opponents may be only a cover for some other purpose, such as personal advancement, aggrandizement, or political victory. A company in court with its employees may make valid claims, but be motivated by greedy self-interest, in defiance of good morals and law, nevertheless. A corrupt politician may have some good points in his defense, but that is not sufficient.

That which is good in the ideas of a radical ought not to be taken as the best indication of the radical’s intention. Marxists always support liberal ideas (sometimes good for a country, sometimes not), until they have taken over. Thus free speech allows them to propagate their ideas, but no one ought to expect free speech after their ascent to power. Advocacy of the rights of all peoples gains them sympathy, but they care nothing for all peoples. So any revolutionary movement supports the “right causes” in the short term, as a means of advancing their revolutionary agenda. They are not sincere, and ought to be distrusted. No one screams in public, “I am a radical!” The naive and innocent only find out when it is too late.

Bernie Sanders is a revolutionary opportunist. He will support any cause that advances the revolution. The riots following the death of George Floyd had nothing to do with George Floyd. It would be more accurate to say that George Floyd was exploited for political advantage. Sometimes political advantage and the common good are in accord. It is rare for one side to fight gerrymandering, voter fraud, &c., unless they stand to gain by it. But where they do stand to gain, so does the nation. But where one side pretend to be moderates with good ideas to disguise corruption or advance a radical agenda, one is justified in attending more to the corruption or radicalism than to the good ideas.

At present, perhaps the Democrat party has some good ideas. Were they moderated, they might contribute to a healthy balance of power between the two parties. But they should not be taken as defining the Democrat party. They are a mere ticket to success. The majority of elected Democrats see in them personal political victory; the powerful minority see heralds of the revolution. No appeal to good faith will cause them to jettison their radicalism and cultivate their moderation. Moderation and radicalism alike are a mere part of the machine, which many are vying to control.

The Democrat party has some good ideas. But they lose legitimacy insofar as these have been appropriated and perfected by President Trump and the Republicans. No one is perfect. However, sometimes the truth on one side is also known on the other. This is the best design for averting revolution. Or sometimes error is common to both sides.

If Democrats and Republicans alike have good ideas, it is odd that there is extreme political division in our country. But this division is over fundamental matters that must and will be resolved. The fact of division points to the fact of meaningful division, and it is obfuscation to say emotions are merely overwrought.

There could in the long term be no compromise over slavery. Even less can there be compromise between the right and the radical left, for the precise reason that the radical left is truly radical. There can be no compromise between the liberal elite and the independent people. Nor can there even be compromise between conservatives and liberals. It is the great myth of moderation—that a country may remain permanently balanced between two antagonistic and fundamentally disharmonious philosophies. Society will always gain momentum toward one philosophy or the other, until one has won the day. Any appearance of compromise is temporary. Indeed, with the radical left, there are two possibilities. The great battle will be fought now in the present (or at some time in the future), or we shall continue to compromise until the radical left wins in the final charge. There is no hope of compromise with the radical left, because the radical left does not see it as a compromise, they see it as a victory. Equivocation promises defeat.

The professors on the liberal left do not believe in evil, so they do not see how a person would want to be on the side of good. To justify evil is to be complicit in evil. To trifle with lies is to affirm lies. Therefore—to end in a moralizing strain—we must fight the good fight, and regain the “confidence of truth.”
