---
layout: post
title: "President Trump and the Decadent Society: Part Two"
description: "Where does President Trump fit into the picture of the decadent society painted in the last essay?..."
---

Where does President Trump fit into the picture of the decadent society painted in the last essay? His ethics, character, crudity, rhetoric indicate that he is the very consummation of decadence; that decadence could not be called decadent till this boor won the presidency. But one sure sign of decadence is a corrupt establishment. And Trump was the anti-establishment and anti-corruption candidate in 2016. Corrupt societies, being a-historical, also drift or plunge violently away from the past. And Trump, in 2020, is the defender of American traditions, the American system, Constitution, and American history generally.

Every conservative aspiring to Congress or the presidency is theoretically committed to dredging the federal bureaucracies at this point miles deep in mud—or whatever fetid, virulent substance composes a swamp. Trump too promised to drain the swamp. In order to drain a swamp, it is necessary to reduce the size of bureaucracies, and fight corruption in and around government. With regard to the first point, Trump has cut many regulations, and reduced the size of most federal agencies, including the regulatory agencies. Veteran Affairs and the Department of Homeland Security have grown, but for good reason.

But the swamp is especially malignant not as a shapeless mass which tends to smother things and people, but as a fearsome beast that pursues its own policies and attacks its enemies in defiance of justice, law, and the American people. Thus the corruption of the intelligence community has come to light under Trump. “Deep state” bureaucrats have resisted his policies and been removed. The Mueller Investigation was a scandal. Trump arrived in Washington with the entire apparatus of the “deep state” against him, and to the extent that he has successfully fought it, he has served the interests of our democracy.

And our elected officials have not proved immune to corruption. The impeachment was an entirely partisan and corrupt affair. The corruption of the Obama administration has come to light, and partisanship alone has saved Obama from bringing upon himself worse infamy than Nixon.

Democrats, during Trump’s presidency, have thought they could act with impunity, but their corruption has become apparent to anyone listening and watching. The Democrat party is a morally empty coalition attached to power and nihilistically opposed to everything else, especially the incumbent president. The radicals—who, one must admit, at least have ideals—are for their part repugnant. Under Trump, Democrats have come into their own, one might say. They have shown exactly what they are, and that is a good thing.

Under Trump, the left has shown its true colors. This is almost incalculably useful for Americans, since sooner or later things must come to a head with the left, and the sooner the better, since the longer it is delayed, the more powerful the left becomes. Trump goads the left to the point of insanity—the point at which people are most likely to question it. When a wave crashes and breaks against a rock, there is turbulence. So it is with Trump. The left breaks against him, and the eyes of many are opened. Or at least we hope they are. One can only for so long sound like a raving idiot, while ignoring the true problems faced by the American people, and pawning off fake solutions to fake problems instead, before people begin to wake up.

Trump can claim partial credit for the growing distrust of the media. Not only did he bring “fake news” to the nation’s attention, he continually sends news sources into an ever-tightening tailspin which damages their creditability. The media explodes into flames whenever Trump appears, and though many take the bait, others begin to grow incredulous, and some are driven by it directly into the arms of conservatism. Mainstream media is destroying itself. As are other institutions, including Hollywood and professional sports. Trump stirs up the left to its own destruction, which is excellent for the country in the long term, as long as conservatives win the battle for our nation’s future (by defeating radical leftism; a modest goal, which pales in comparison to the retaking of modernity for tradition and faith, which must ever be the ultimate aim of conservatism). Victor Davis Hanson has compared Trump to a chemotherapy that kills the cancer without killing the host.

Trump seems to instinctively oppose the left, where the Republican party has already rolled over and exposed its soft underbelly. Indeed, where many conservatives of more intellectual ilk have managed to concede themselves all the way over to the other side—giving away one point after another, till they perhaps someday realize that they have nothing left to give, on the grounds of nothing more substantial than the thin imposture of truth cloaking the left’s arguments—Trump does not concede points just to be nice. He has opposed the removal of confederate statues and censorship of the confederate flag. Many principled and refined conservatives, meanwhile, have granted that outrage and sensitivity and existential despair over the brooding existence of these tokens of evil might be justified, and that with the end in mind of listening to everybody and moving together toward a brighter and more unified future, we ought to erase our history, and humiliate that favorite object of humiliation, the South. Trump has opposed the renaming of military bases named after confederates, something many so-called conservatives have supported. His case against renaming them, made to Chris Wallace, was essentially correct.

Trump is instinctively opposed to all things politically correct. He couldn’t speak the language of the left if he tried. It is, of course, easy to bow one’s neck under the yoke of political correctness, reasoning that since there is no reason not to use the fashionable forms of discourse, one might as well use them. But it is better to oppose political correctness, wherever it is spotted, so long as one does not depart from the truth. Of course political correctness is less objectionable in regulating the forms of speech than in regulating the content.

The Republican party is better than the Democrat, but weak, and at times unconcerned with the interests of its constituents. Before Trump, both parties had committed themselves to continued globalization, the loss of manufacturing jobs overseas, open borders, &c., thus betraying the heartland. Trump the outsider spoke to the heartland.

Trump has generally been willing to speak truth where others have not. He caught the attention of black conservative Candace Owens with his willingness to recognize the problems in black communities, problems which generations of Democrats have done nothing to solve, and have to a certain extent created—with the words, addressed to black America, “What do you have to lose?” Indeed, time and again, Trump, to the annoyance of the intellectuals, has spoken the obvious truth, even where the benefits of doing so are not obvious. Trump is not an ideologue. But the intellectuals are ideologues, and so are the experts. Trump has ignored the intellectuals, and been willing to criticize the experts, even with regard to the covid-19 virus. Trump has no dues to pays or offerings to offer at the shrine of an abstract system, and is thus free to look into every particular issue, and do as he thinks best.

Trump’s hyperbole and bombast are easy to spot. His lies are palpable. His truths are of much greater consequence. Every conventional politician lies; what matters more is when they tell the truth. Trump cannot admit to error or loss. What conventional politician can? But, as has often been pointed out, Trump’s hyperbole often contains a kernel of truth. No one really believed it was “millions and millions.” But we all understood the point.

Trump, historically speaking, is no exemplar of presidential conduct. But he serves two functions: first, that of “chemotherapy.” Secondly, Trump is a functionalist president. He gives the American people function, rather than smooth-turned phrases. There is a portion of the intellectual right which prefers the smooth-turned phrases, turning up its nose in ill-humor, miffed, and sniffing at the degeneracy of the American people; then taking to a platform to whine about the lasting harm Trump has done to standards, norms, presidential rhetoric, civil discourse, dignity, propriety, decorum, comeliness, seemliness, &c., not realizing that in a time of decadence and corruption, the outer show is prioritized over the essential function. Form takes precedence, and the collapse of civilization is masked in words. Trump has done away with the words, and come through with regard to the function.

We need not mention the economy, with the issues of foreign policy that go along with it. Trump has reoriented foreign policy to serve American interests, rather than the status quo. He has stood strong on the important point of immigration. Trump has fought corruption through policy by resisting senseless globalization where it does not serve American interests. Thus he withdrew from the Paris Climate Accord. And more recently, he cut off funding for the corrupt World Health Organization, controlled by China.

Trump is on his way to entirely remaking the federal judiciary. This would be a sign of partisanship, since he is appointing conservative judges, except that conservative judges are often the only judges who respect the Constitution and the law. Thus Trump has fought the corruption of the judiciary.

Those who complain about Trump’s rhetoric are themselves more convincing signs of decadence than Trump, who dispenses with the rhetoric but delivers on the function. He sees the problem, they see only the method. He sees the American people, they see norms.

In one respect, Trump has perhaps contributed to decadence. Some evangelicals, in particular among members of the religious right, may have grown more political and less religious under Trump. But that is a problem which already existed, and if it has become worse under Trump, it is only because the religious right finally felt it had a president on its side. The rot, as usual, goes deeper than Trump. Some evangelicals have abandoned religion for politics: that is not his fault.

Trump’s faults are obvious, but to rain down hot tears upon the barren soil of our degenerate country because Trump involved himself in a rhetorical jungle, going deep into the rabbit hole of a sentence with an ever-shifting end; or because he made another comment in poor taste; and to thus overlook the legitimate accomplishments of the president, is to show the sort of shortsightedness which characterizes a decadent society. Trump may have broken norms, but then again, in a decadent society, that is exactly what needs to happen.

All told, I think Trump has fought decadence more than he has contributed to it, and is a sign of hope rather than decay.
