---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry: Has Eliot Triumphed? [Ⅴ]"
description: "Some have maintained for Eliot that his is a voice crying out for tradition from within the heart of modernity..."
---

Some have maintained for Eliot that his is a voice crying out for tradition from within the heart of modernity. Either he uses the forms of modernity to voice his dissent from modernity; or he uses the forms of modernity while claiming descent from Virgil and Dante; or both.

That he dissents from modernity is a questionable statement. To be sure, he presents a picture of modernity that no reasonable man could affirm, but such was already far from the thoughts of many of us. In _The Waste Land_, he evokes a series of images, offers up a farrago of broken allusions, and uses broken speech, and so forth, the result being a fragmented whole, which is unsparing in its portrayal of the time. To ask whether transcendence can be found lurking in _The Waste Land_, whether there is any hint of redemption from its barrenness, is, I believe, to ask the wrong question.

The question is whether redemption from modernity can be found within modernity itself; whether Eliot, using the tools of the modern age, can show us the light of timeless truth. For Eliot is not one describing modernity from the perspective of one who stands outside of it. The very tongue and spirit of modernity are his. Otherwise, if he failed to give expression to the spirit of the age, there would be no need to write this book. For then he would not have succeeded in his endeavor, and would have no claim to the title of a great poet.

Eliot as a poet is a liberator and a shatterer. Within his poetry, he does not build. But that is not the issue. He destroys, but in destroying, he uses the language of the modern world. One could forgive him a few spare morbid turns of phrase if the whole tendency of his poetry were not to turn the guns of modernity against modernity. It would seem reasonable to do so, except that the guns of modernity, being a part of modernity, must themselves be caught in the fire. Eliot can reject modernity, but he cannot reject modernism, and modernism is a part of modernity.

The tendency of modern art is toward meaninglessness and despair. Free verse, as the rejection of form, is best suited to nihilism. Though Eliot’s poetry might not be nihilistic, it is only because he does not approve the image of the world he is presenting. Eliot is able to use the forms of modernity in The Waste Land because he is speaking of the modern world. But the limitation of using those forms is that he cannot dissent from modernism in art, and modernism in art is as nihilistic and hateful as modernity generally.

Eliot may offer a way forward for society—that is not my question here. I do not believe he offers a way forward for the poet.

Eliot wrote ugliness as poetry. I have heard it said that he shows us that ugliness can serve as great art. If this is true, and it seems to be at the essence of any honest defense of Eliot, then I must throw up my hands and retreat to the Middle Ages. If art does not need to be beautiful to go by that name, I can no longer contend. I can only say, “So be it. Have it your way. Read your Eliot; and revel in your ugliness. As for me, I hold to the good old fashioned view that there is enough of ugliness in life, that we do not need it in poetry, and that if one is culturally illiterate if one is not conversant with all the greatest ugly poems, so be it.” No defense can be made of ugly poetry, and so there is no reason for one to attack it. One can only assert dogmatically that beauty is good and ugliness is an evil, or assert dogmatically that beauty and ugliness both may be goods.

Traditionally it has been held that there is some objective standard, some ideal form, by which we are to judge the beautiful. Modernity has attacked this notion, proposing instead, absurdly, that all beauty is subjective. But if we, the most modern of all, propose that the debate is ill-founded, and that there is no reason to favor the beautiful over the ugly, and that the ugly may be great art in its own right, then I say only that one cannot argue with this sort of logic.

But if it is said that Eliot’s poetry is not ugly, that it is beautiful in its own way, with that I cannot agree either. For as I said, if Eliot’s project was successful, if he succeeded in capturing the modern spirit, we must assert that the result is ugly. Otherwise, we must rethink our criticism of the modern world. If Eliot wrote beautiful poetry, while being modern to the core, there is no question that modernity too is beautiful, and that at least is one redemptive feature of modernity. Thus modernity redeems itself, and there is no need for us. If Eliot’s poetry is ugly, we might read it to understand the ugliness of the modern world. But we need not reverence the poet of ugliness.

Of course the ugliness of Eliot’s poetry is inextricably bound to the vision of the world he is presenting. Thus we see that poetry is restricted in message by certain restrictions in medium. Since poetry cannot be ugly and remain poetry, it cannot present to us a picture of an ugly world—unless it transcends that world through its very language.

This brings us to Dostoevsky’s assertion that “Beauty will save the world.” In a world that has lost sight of the good and the true, only the beautiful remains to seize man against his will or knowledge. The ugly may serve its purpose in the project of redemption. Man may be so transfixed and repulsed by the ugly that he will catch at any hint of beauty breaking through the gloom. If I remember correctly, Screwtape, in _The Screwtape Letters_, consistently advises his devil nephew to steer his charge away from extremes. Even the ugly may play a role in salvation. Man may be driven by the ugly toward the beautiful. But that is no reason to think that the ugly should be reverenced and imitated. Eliot’s poetry might serve a useful purpose, and we might be grateful to him, but we must nonetheless reject and repudiate his poetry entirely.

No one should expect Eliot to do more than he did. And it is only fair to judge his poetry with reference to his other writings. If he showed us the ugliness of the modern world, to him we should be grateful. But it is not ungrateful to insist that we recognize the fact. Eliot’s poetry is the poetry of ugliness and decay. And we must reconsider our own aesthetic practice. We shall then have taken one step closer to a place where we shall perhaps triumph over modernity.
