---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry: Modern Psychology [Ⅶ]"
description: "In the sight of the Christian and the classical poet is a vision of order..."
---

In the sight of the Christian and the classical poet is a vision of order. But Eliot shares his vision with the modern psychologist. (“The point of view which I am struggling to attack is perhaps related to the metaphysical theory of the substantial unity of the soul”—a phrase which exhibits one of the core misunderstandings that afflict modern psychology. Even if the soul is not substantially one, in any sense at all, there is no reason not to treat it as though it were. Perhaps by treating the soul as in some sense an entity, it will become more of an entity, and we shall become more human.)

It will be heard in defenses of Eliot that he gives expression to the inherent order of the psyche, or at least that he evokes what is inarticulate and probably inarticulable in our subconscious. If this is true, it should do nothing to alter our view of modern poetry, unless we abandon all thought of human reason. Modern psychology makes a great fool of itself, and renders itself irrelevant for the future, by maintaining that it has taken over the study of ethics, and otherwise greedily appropriating to itself things which belong in the domain of philosophy. Modern psychology does not seek truth, or consider that it is no help to man to act naturally, since, as has been said, the most empirically substantiated Christian doctrine is the doctrine of original sin. Man needs an ethical code precisely because he cannot simply “be natural.” To ask him to be natural is to risk letting him degenerate into a demon. But if he does not sink that far, he will at least degenerate, and become a beast. That is the reason, one reason, why the modern psychologists, New Atheists, utilitarians, and so forth put themselves at a grave disadvantage—because man wants to be man, and they would have him become a glorified ape—which, of course, he becomes to the extent that he thinks of himself as one.

And this is the risk attendant on modern poetry. It robs man, like psychology, of his capacity to reason and make sense of the universe. It reduces him to a psyche in a soma—a preliminary step: he then becomes an indeterminate will in a body. Modern poetry is unsustainable, just as certain trends in modern psychology are unsustainable. Until man discovers a way to be less than himself without any ill-effects—and that is the day life will cease to be worth living—it will always be dangerous for him not to aspire toward the heavens. If he does not propose to become more than he is, he will become tragically less. For man is the only creature who must strive in order to be. But he cannot strive toward anything without reason.

The modern poet differs from the modern psychologist in this respect: he does not reserve reason even for his own uses. Thus his poetry does not have the effect of placing the poet in the position of being a member of an elite circle of rational individuals, who can tell us how to be, since we the many cannot know. Modern science appropriates the use of reason to itself; that is why it is not improper to speak of the totalitarian leanings of science. But the modern poet does not suppose even he can reason. Instead, the role of rational individual in a disordered universe falls to the critic. But the critic can do no more than speak in fuzzy language of fuzzy language.

The tendency to dehumanize man is one that must always be fought. But whatever the full humanity of man consists in, doubtless reason—clear, unmuddied reason—is at least instrumental to get there. We cannot even discuss the transcendent—and there can be no doubt that man needs the transcendent—if we do not have the capacity to reason as individuals. But if we do have the capacity, we ought to use it, not muddle it hopelessly with evocative language.

It is empirically verifiable that man has the capacity to be immensely rational. He has no need of science to give him his ethics, or of modern poetry to tease out his inchoate feelings. Man has the capacity to transcend the time he lives in. He then has no need of history except to the extent that much wisdom and truth comes out of it. He has no need of an intuitive sixth sense, except to the extent that it can be tested rationally. But the whole tendency of Eliot’s principles is to produce poetry which cannot be understood rationally.

Man has the capacity to resist the direction of history, thereby changing it. There is no need for him to yield to modernism. Man has the capacity for excellence. But he is robbed, stripped, and shorn of everything but his roiling subconscious by modern psychology and modern poetry.

Modern poetry claims to communicate in the language of the subconscious, putting us in more intimate touch with the “deeper, unnamed feelings which form the substratum of our being.” It is this we must fight at every step. This is to systematically rob man of his capacity to reason, reducing him to the condition of beasts or demons.
