---
layout: post
title: "In What Salvation Consists"
description: "Salvation for the West, and specifically for America, lies in virtue..."
---

Salvation for the West, and specifically for America, lies in virtue. It is the only thing universal enough to save us. And virtue, of course, is virtually impossible without religion.

We are alternately told that salvation consists in poetry, memory, rediscovery of vocation, or something else so peripheral to our culture that even the optimist, with _that_ expedient, must despair of the future. “Would we only embrace an obscure concept long propounded by imaginative conservatives the world over, hope would not yet be lost!” If that is our best hope, all hope is lost, as I think everyone realizes. There must be some more mainstream way to save our country.

Looking back, the only thing that has ever saved a country is virtue, because only the loss of virtue can destroy a country. This is obvious in the history of the Roman Empire. Economic causes may lead to a lapse of virtue, or foreign conquest may, but a nation determined and resilient, sometimes stern, an incorruptible nation, a nation endowed with the confidence that comes of principle and strength cannot long be ground underfoot.

A debile nation, on the other hand, sapped of all principle, strength, and vitality, and pressed upon by enemies foreign and domestic, cannot long endure, unless reinvigorated by the wellsprings of virtue. To prescribe the _Divine Comedia_ as an antidote to social ills is not mistaken in its way, but it is sorely mistaken nevertheless. A nation that would give ear to such advice would not be in need of it. To extol St. Augustine as one who wrote in a time of general ruin, from whom we could profit greatly, is to forget that when St. Augustine wrote, no one listened to him then either. Preaching St. Augustine, we are preaching to the choir—which is not bad, but the choir is already converted. On the other hand, for a teacher to inspire his students with a love of Dante or appreciation of St. Augustine takes virtue, and may be a true step toward salvation. This is a subtle but important distinction.

No simple idea will spread through society and rekindle the ancient fires. For ideas are powerful only insofar as they are embodied in powerful (in this case virtuous) forces that can confront other forces and achieve victory. It is all well and good, for instance, to talk about “moderation,” but moderation only comes about through the defeat of extremism, and that takes virtue, not the sort of hair-clutching on the sidelines that sometimes characterizes the “forces” of moderation. True “moderation” turns out to be nothing less than an “extreme” assault on the predominating repugnant forms of “extremism.” It is neither neutral nor impartial.

There is one idea that can spread through society and rekindle virtue. This is the religious idea. For virtue’s source, where it is powerful at all, is in religion. Individuals break this rule—through who knows what mechanism of self-delusion or self-control. But a society of atheists will usually look an awful lot more like late eighteenth century France than late eighteenth century America.

Virtue is necessary, and not only virtue, but virtue taken to the point of extremity, which is what we call courage. We do not need to describe courage. Everyone knows what it is. The Founding Fathers, who resisted the throne of England, then established a new constitution, were courageous. Rosa Parks, who refused to give up her seat on a bus, was courageous. Soldiers who fight in wars are often courageous. Workers underground who smuggled Jews out of Germany were courageous. Professors who defy the mob, and call the spirit of political correctness and persecution what she is, a Harpy, may or may not be courageous, depending on the pressure on them.

Courage is necessary, thought it is not pacifying. Resistance to the forces of evil is like impeding the flow of a great stream: it produces turbulence rather than calm. But virtue taken to the extreme of courage, as I said, assumes the form of force on force. And force on force is not pacific. Virtue may be infallibly polite, ingenious when it comes to building bridges, soothing even as it destroys, but in the end, it is a powerful force that produces a reaction, like other forces. There are a variety of _modi operandi_ in virtuous war, ranging from bombastic declamation, to mild but firm resistance, to simple staunch refusal to budge, to gentle humor, to cutting sarcasm—all of which are valuable. But the common element is virtue taken to the extreme of courage.

We live in a time in which it is easier than ever to resist the forces of evil. Merely by pushing back, merely by refusing to bow before the Harpy, one can do one’s part, and without significant physical danger to oneself. Our nation will only survive if we are able to muster the virtue to resist evil.

The libertarians and classical liberals believe we must “make the case for capitalism,” or freedom. Perhaps we must, and perhaps these efforts are a disguise for virtue, but we must remember that we are fighting a war of ideas, true, but the emphasis is on the war, not the ideas. Whether libertarian ideas are sufficient to carry us through to another island of calm is doubtful, but whatever the case, whatever ideas we adopt, we must ram them down the throats of our enemies with virtuous action.

We might do well to read the _Divine Comedia_. But whatever we do, we must never cease fighting, with the sort of rough, vigorous virtue that defines a time gasping for breath in the oppressive atmosphere of hateful and ruinous ideas.

The efforts of the imaginative conservatives are good, but only as a vessel for the one most important thing, which is virtue. As I implied, however, we must tap the springs of virtue, and virtuously declaim against the rot in institutional religion, and reinvigorate the churches, thereby cultivating virtue at its source.
