---
layout: post
title: "In Defense of Nationalism"
description: "They say that love of country is a prejudice..."
---

To contrast globalism with nationalism, and assert that there is nothing in between, is one form of that unfortunate habit of intellectuals of fitting life into systems which do not represent reality. To assert that there is a spectrum of middle options running between the two, is to employ a favorite system in current use, which also does not represent reality. Spectrums often crop up when one takes a fuzzy-eyed view of things. It is the function of reason to draw finer distinctions, not to throw up its hands and scream, “There’s a spectrum!”

But certainly there are varieties of globalism and varieties of nationalism. Globalism is the naive doctrine of putting the interests of all nations on roughly equal grounds, whereas nationalism is the historically sound doctrine of putting the interests of one’s own nation first. That nationalism is immoral is plainly false; that it leads to, or is the same thing as, Nazism or Fascism is silly. A nation can protect its interests abroad within the bounds of justice. Indeed, for it to do otherwise would be unjust—unjust to itself and to its own citizens, to whom such protection is owed.

I have realized of late that for some members of the intellectual elite, thinking in a utilitarian and liberal strain, there is no difference between a citizen of one’s own country and a citizen of the world. Thus limits on immigration are the fruit of prejudice, or worse, inhumanity, since they draw distinctions between people. Opposition to unlimited immigration is one form of tribalism. This is palpably false. Tribalism is irrational, instinctual. But opposition to unlimited immigration may be perfectly rational. One is a citizen of a country; that country, in direct contravention of its citizens’ interests, permits cheap labour, crime, and vice to flood in; one feels one has been betrayed; one votes to stop it.

A member of the intellectual elite is not a tribalist because he or she does not stand to lose by immigration. A worker in manufacturing in the Midwest is a tribalist because he does. Thus it is not the workers who are prejudiced; it is the elite, sequestered in a strip of Coastal privilege, who are walled off from reality.

It is irrational, then, to equate nationalism with tribalism—the more so since the nation is too big to be a tribe. Nationalism is instead associated with patriotism and self-interest. Without looking into the rationality of the former sentiment, we can all agree that the latter is rational. It is in the interest of Americans for America to conduct her foreign policy on the lines of American interest. The question is whether it ought to be done.

Which returns us to the point made by the intellectuals, that there being no difference between American citizens and citizens of other countries, America ought not to preserve her national interests. It is a weak point.

So long as it is a reality that there are nation-states in the world, we ought to recognize this objective reality, and order ourselves according to it. The nation-state is a necessary institution, as I pointed out in a recent essay. It is desirable to have international law, such as has always obtained between nation-states. But to expect one nation-state (America) to unilaterally betray her own interests, and act as though we inhabit a global family of nations, bound together by love and mutual understanding, is to display one’s naivete for all the world to see. We live in a world of nation-states, with both competing and shared interests, each of which is responsible for looking after its citizens. The autoworkers union does not protect service employees, and if it did, the whole system would fall apart.

Were America to conduct herself in a spirit of benevolence and enlightened goodwill toward her fellow nations, she would find herself cheated of everything she owns. It can hardly be otherwise. So long as nation-states are a reality, there will always be nations that do not choose to ignore it. Those that do are not enlightened, they are naive.

America is not permitted to be a kindly mother gathering a flock of dependant nations to her bosom. But should she not then permit the tempest-tost of the world to fly to her if they wish? Are not limits on immigration immoral? According to the traditional notion, morality is an ordering of self according to objective reality. This reality encompasses more than physical fact, but misty-eyed dreaming and visions of paradise have no part of it. The responsibility of the nation is to its own citizens. Let a migrant once become a citizen, and he or she will be taken fully into the fold. But until then, the nation is charged with looking after its own citizens’ interests, and will do so, even to the exclusion of perfectly good people who want a part of it, but whose coming would be detrimental to the lawful citizens of the nation.

To permit unlimited immigration is naive, untruthful, and even immoral. We can examine the consequences were the practice to be generalized. The world would see crowds of opportunists and criminals preying upon the nations with the best living conditions. And, in the end, as living conditions equalized, the world would be flooded with one homogeneous mass of lawlessness and anarchy. Civilization would collapse.

Were America to accept the dregs of the world, according to a literal interpretation of _The New Colossus_, she would ultimately find herself unable to sustain the conditions that made her so desirable an object of migration in the first place.

One should take care, in thinking oneself enlightened, that one is not ignoring the objective conditions of reality, which to know, is the true essence of enlightenment.
