---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry: The Waste Land [Ⅷ]"
description: "If we admit the validity of the various critiques of modernism, it will nevertheless be urged upon me that special exception must be given to the poetry of T.S. Eliot, and especially The Waste Land..."
---

If we admit the validity of the various critiques of modernism, it will nevertheless be urged upon me that special exception must be given to the poetry of T.S. Eliot, and especially _The Waste Land_.

Though Eliot did not see _The Waste Land_ as simply giving expression to the disillusionment of a generation, such has been maintained, and we must examine the idea. It is said, then, that in judging Eliot’s poetry one must account for the historical context. I need say no more than that _The Waste Land_ was published in 1922, and the sympathetic reader will set his fancy to work, building accounts of a war-torn and pandemic-racked world, struggling to find meaning in the pointlessness of it all, and unable to piece together a culture fragmented into shards. But, not to put it too callously, that is no concern of ours. We have the greatest sympathy for the generation in which Eliot published (and every generation since), but we deal with the timeless, and our question is whether Eliot’s poetry is timeless.

We must not forget the circumstances of the twentieth century. They must live on, variously expressed. I am entirely orthodox on this point. But we cannot feel the feelings of those who lived through this time. Therefore, we resort to the universal medium used by man to communicate over time and space. We resort to reason.

The question is not whether those who peopled the generation of the first world war were justified in feeling in such a way that Eliot’s poetry could speak for them. Certainly many of them had a good excuse. But the fullest expression of their feelings, in rational language, would justify their feelings better than the language of modern poetry ever could.

In the first draft of this book, I intended to include a chapter on the “irrelevance” of Eliot’s poetry. I was to maintain that it was “foreign” to man—that man could not be recognized in it. My claim was primarily founded on the mistaken universality of Eliot’s picture of despair, the implication that we are all men “with bald spots in the middle of our hair.” But the charge was weak. It would be a shame not to have poetry capturing man in moments of extremity. But it would be unbearably tragic not to have rational and articulate poetry capturing man in moments of extremity. If in the most extreme moments, our feelings are not only inarticulate, but we cannot describe them without recourse to evocative language, that is truly a shame.

The subtle conservative reader will say that Eliot used his poetry as a mirror. He held it up to the culture around him. It does not matter if any glimpses of redemption can be seen in that hazy glass. The question is not even whether a mirror can continue to reflect light once the source has gone away—whether tradition can be seen in Eliot’s modernism. And the question is not whether evocative poetry may continue to evoke certain feelings for a long time.

For Eliot did not attempt to render the inarticulate articulate. He did not attempt to describe the inarticulate rationally. He gave expression to the inarticulate as inarticulate. But there was no need. The inarticulate is our starting point. It is already there. It is felt, and the feeling is not better understood when expressed in poetry. That is because the feeling by definition is not understood. The poet must either render the inarticulate articulate, or describe it from a certain remove. Otherwise, he is a passive and unnecessary step in the chain.

The question is whether, in a world which already tends to dehumanize man, it is not proper for the poet to continue in his role as a humanizer. It would be indefensible were any modern poet to perfectly capture the spirit of the age we live in, without any hint of sublimation or transcendence. If decadence and decay are our subjects, there is no reason to give direct expression to them. They are all around—they surround us. If fragmentation and despair were dominant moods in the twentieth century, there was no reason to capture them in poetry. The purpose of poetry should have been to point a way out of the Waste Land, or at the very least, describe the Waste Land in the rational language which is a universal source of hope.

One does not need to ask anything more profound than whether it is appropriate for poetry to become ugly and chaotic, in order to express the full ugliness and chaos of the world. If poetry is to remain poetry, surely there is a line at which its descriptive powers must cease.
