---
layout: post
title: "Liberalism and Party"
description: "It has long been recognized that all contradictions in liberal philosophy or practice are reconciled in the judgment of the Party..."
---

It has long been recognized that all contradictions in liberal philosophy or practice are reconciled in the judgment of the Party. Liberals are full of contradictions, and what is more, it never seems to bother them. At least they are all pulling together. Conservatives are more scrupulous, and will tear each other to feathers over a mere quibbling point, while generously indulging the perplexed errors of their enemies. One gets the feeling that many conservatives desire nothing more than a relatively consistent form of liberalism. But liberals want no such thing, because liberalism, as both philosophy and practice, may rise any number of ways from the broad preconceptions on which it rests, which are subject to multiple interpretations, and is really too vague to offer anything but a fuzzy arrow pointing into a bright future slightly obstructed by the ugly window-stain of reactionary forces. The inconsistencies and ambiguities of relativism and nihilism are reconciled in the consistency of death, of utilitarianism in the benevolent state, and of liberalism in the Party. These are generalizations almost as fuzzy as liberalism itself, but the concord thereby established will do nicely for our purposes. It must be understood, in short, that modernity is the province of emotions and psychology, with reason in their service, at the expense of truth—and the only escape is into the void and nonentity.

Still, one must ask why liberals never seem to question the Party line. Perhaps this is partly an institutional inheritance, but it also seems to be constant over the course of liberal history. Certainly we may say that liberals value uniformity—that liberalism is an ideology which by its very nature leaves no room for diversity of anything abstract that has to do with individual human beings. Liberals affirm a universal reason that leaves no room for the particular, and is not even informed by love, prudence, or anything that might soften its assault on the constitution of being. Liberals use every tool at their disposal to create and enforce uniformity. Certain key aspects of their ideology (mass education, for instance) are instrumental in this respect. Liberalism breeds in mass settings; the two great mills of generic liberals are universities and cities.

Liberals are hopelessly naive. Thus they are subject to the depredations of Party run by cynical characters. They believe (I say, as a polemical generalization) that anyone with the right politics is almost by definition a good person. This makes sense, for two reasons. Firstly, moderns tend to ascribe simultaneously more and less importance to beliefs than is warranted. They seem to think what a person believes is unimportant (it is one of the most important things about him), but they also in practice believe all virtues are intellectual virtues (at least where they are not emotional or mystical). Rather, they do not notice virtue but correctness of sentiment. And they, as I said, are naive, especially about human nature, which they think is inherently good. Evil is a product of nature, bad institutions (the past), and ignorance. Thus any educated, modern, progressive liberal is by definition good, and may be trusted. Sometimes liberals are not as naive as all this: common sense will have its day, even against the most insurmountable odds.

Liberals are ideologues. They live in a dream world. Ideology is rather a replacement for truth than a certain set of beliefs constituting what one thinks truth is. It becomes more necessary to shut out all truth and contact with the world as one becomes ever more entombed in ideological delusion. One has no choice but to either embrace reality in a sudden rush, or flee from it with laudable perseverance. Liberals, like all ideologues, live in the future, with only a remote connection with the past, and thus are disconnected from reality. All these things considered, they have no choice but to adopt the official Party line, fed to them directly through mass media, or having filtered down through society and permeated their living culture. The music thus piped to them by the Party is a replacement for any direct experience of the harsh conditions of life. It is their reality, the world in which they live, and they think they experience it intensely, are very familiar with all its niches and corners, because it is so consistent and perfect that it must be true. This is not ideology, merely abstraction from reality such as especially besets urbanites, educated to think the world is simple, and without the spiritual depths ever to discover otherwise.

Liberal ideology is chock full of all sorts of beliefs conducive to uniformity and adherence to the Party line. Liberals believe themselves supremely Enlightened, educated, rational, scientific, good, generous, sympathetic, and kind—and thus are free to be as unenlightened, ignorant, irrational, blind, trusting, and superstitious, wicked, ungenerous, pitiless, thoughtless and unkind as they please. Liberalism breed hubris—practically is hubris.

Liberalism sets itself apart from all “prior” thought, and thus creates an exclusive (not very exclusive) club of those the rightness of whom goes without saying. It creates an atmosphere of uniformity (all the things worth knowing are obvious) that in practice is conducive to _blind_ uniformity, and, ultimately, adherence to the Party line.

Here is another answer: if you don’t believe anything, you’ll believe everything: in this case, everything the Party tells you. And liberals don’t believe anything. Leastwise, they don’t believe in truth (though, God bless ‘em, they still try to be good people). Reason as method or with contemptible substance allows for no substantial convictions that might provide ballast against the winds of doctrine. Besides, reason as method ultimately means trust in the experts. The antidote for this, as for many liberal disorders, is historical knowledge, but they have none of that, except such as has been spoon fed to them after being deemed tolerable, harmless, innocuous.

A person’s highest beliefs are his religion. Man is a religious animal, who needs some form of worship, and what is more, worship in a corporate body, which the Party and liberalism provide. The Party is the Church for liberals, and activity in its service with belief in its infallibility and eternality provide meaning. It is obvious, from a facile interaction with liberals, that their liberalism is sacred to them, which in practice means the Party is sacred to them.

Liberalism, as I said, has certain contradictions inherent to it. These contradictions are reconciled in the bosom of the Party. How is it that liberals, suffused with love for universal man and respect for all men’s ideas, despise conservatives with a passion, or at least coldly ostracize them whenever it is incumbent on them to brook their presence? Perhaps because, for one thing, they value uniformity. But on the other hand, liberals are very willing to embrace Islam, transgenderism, and other things entirely counter to their earlier feminist ideology. I think this has something to do with a hierarchy of the oppressed known in one manifestation as “intersectionalism.” Liberals also believe they can have everything not merely both ways but every way. This too has its root in their naivete. Perhaps it is partly random. Uniformity facilitates random spontaneous impulses toward one object that might as well be another. Indeed, these impulses are usually guided by powerful interests.

Liberals seem not mind diversity in the form of some out-of-the-way minority group, which is not a threat, when there is capital to be had by valuing it volubly (on the other hand, liberals are not afraid to embark on mighty projects of cultural imperialism in faraway lands, even as they wear Kendi scarves back home). Liberal culture insists more on its own rights even than do other cultures, because it is founded on absolute tolerance, and therefore has nothing in common with cultures founded on some form of “intolerance.” All cultures have at least this much in common: that they are intolerant. But liberalism is different precisely because it is intolerant to intolerance.

Still, we must admit liberalism is rife with contradictions. Identity politics—which are not indigenous to liberalism, regardless of whether they tend to spring up—breed contradictions. The Gospel of Tolerance breeds contradictions. These contradictions must be resolved somehow. Much of liberalism consists in doing one thing while telling oneself one is doing something else. What does one do, and what does one tell oneself? These questions must be resolved.

Liberal contradictions are reconciled in the bosom of the Party. This is to be expected, considering that the most fundamental contradictions are inherent to liberalism. Liberalism abandons truth, and like all “philosophies” (or systems) that abandon truth, it winds up with a very confusing mess of nihilism, utility, sentiment, and certain pseudo-intellectual concepts, which must be reconciled somehow. That is the role of the Party.

Liberal principles are too confused not to be interpreted by central dictate. When and where does truth exist and when and where does it not? Liberals must engage in doublethink, simultaneously not to believe in truth and to believe in it. When and where is “diversity of thought” to be tolerated? In short, there must  be some line beyond which liberals principles are not allowed to go, since otherwise the whole thing would spiral into absurdity and equivocation, and that line is determined by the Party. The “open society” leads to utter uniformity as well as a babel of voices, so where to insist on the uniformity and where to browbeat the enemies of the babel? That, too, will be decided by the Party. There is no consistent way to profess a garden of “free speech” while creating uniformity and babel.

The Party is the only place where a liberal could be told what to think on, say, transgenderism. The accidental preferences of liberals are decided by the Party. It must be so, since liberalism must have accidental preferences. Otherwise it is too vague to know what to do with, people will slip off into philosophy and religion, and before you know it, no one will be a liberal anymore. Liberalism is held together by the Party—which points the finger of universal progress.

Most liberals are not very informed about their politics, so that there is perhaps a sense in which we may say, “People who are not very informed about politics tend to be liberals in our current culture.” Such people, of course, are likely to follow the Party line without question, especially considering the power certain forces have to disseminate and control opinion. Maybe liberals follow the Party line because it is all they hear. There is much truth in that. But one feels, instinctively, that liberals must have some difficulty pursuing truth on their own. Perhaps it is because they do not believe in truth. This, too, is an instance of inconsistency and contradiction. And this, too, leads them to throw up their hands (metaphorically: liberals are never plagued by self-doubt), and trust the Party with the faith of a child. They have no other resort. Everything is political with liberals, and it is all held together by the Party. But I, too, am spiraling into confusion, and therefore, as I find the Party repugnant, must end.
