---
layout: post
title: "On Psychology in Politics"
description: "In the moments of respite caught from worrying about the radical left and the future of our country, one notices an opinion promulgated by a university professor, scientist, pseudo-scholar, or academic name on a book..."
---

In the moments of respite caught from worrying about the radical left and the future of our country, one notices an opinion promulgated by a university professor, scientist, pseudo-scholar, or academic name on a book. It may be cogently argued in said book, drawing on the wisdom of such diverse philosophers, statesmen, and immortal idiots as so-and-so, &c., or published as a piece in one of those journals of contemporary thought and rational discourse and open exchange devoted to publishing articles from across the “political spectrum,” thereby reaping manifold benefits for the state of civility, discourse, and mutual understanding.

The opinion is usually something like this: political differences cannot be explained with reference to ideas, let alone rational ideas, but solely according to universal psychological phenomena. It may take this particular form: we are faced with a portentous threat to the happiness and stability of our country; it is political division; actually, however, it is not political at all; despite what every contestant on both sides of the divide had thought, the divide is nothing more than a manifestation of tribalism; we are irrational apes in a jungle, yowling on behalf of our tribe against another. Or this: most people suffer from delusions of grandeur; they believe they are rational; they are not; their politics are determined, not by reason, but temperament; liberalism is associated with high levels of open-mindedness, compassion, &c., conservatism with the opposite, &c. This is a form of reductionism that is singularly absurd and counterproductive. Probably it does little harm, but it proves that, if we desire normalcy, we must forever disregard the scientists and academics, and turn for insight to cooler and more rational minds.

Let us address the two most common forms of this disease of the mind whereby reason is replaced with psychology. Let us first address the charge of tribalism. First of all, it is worth noting that “tribalism” is a hateful word, by which human beings are at once, as if by a sleight of hand, reduced to the condition of gorillas in a forest warring over a spot of turf. But the surest way to make man a gorilla is to treat him as a gorilla. Thus we hear people talking as if goodness independent of social pressure were a myth, then using their own conduct as an example. Well of course it stands to reason that anyone who thinks goodness independent of social pressure is a myth is not then likely to be good independent of social pressure. So one who holds a deep philosophical conviction that men are gorillas is the best proof of that maxim.

There is another objection to the term “tribalism.” It is a gimmick by which rather shallow fellows raise themselves to the appearance of erudition—it seems somehow scientific; affect impartiality—I of course belong to no tribe; and assume a position of superiority—_I_ of course belong to no tribe, almost uniquely in this highly polarized political climate: dear, dear.

It is then best not to use the term tribalism, except for the purposes of criticism and satire—the tribalists (or how shall we designate them?) are really quite amusing.

It is obvious that the state of current politics cannot be explained solely with reference to tribalism. This being said, if the devil deserves his due, so too does the misguided academic. Obviously the highly charged politics of America in these critical times are conducive to “tribal” behavior. But there are many who have nothing to do with tribalism. They are convinced that for the good of the country their side must win. They observe a spirit of charity toward their opponents. Perhaps they are forced by their opponents’ enmity to forgo much further converse with them. But they are unwilling to compromise on genuinely important ideas.

Where the lines of tribe are drawn abstractly, is there not some possibility that ideas and genuine conviction are in play? Obviously so, and no one denies it. No one, it can safely be said, is a Democrat because he enjoys the experience of tribal warfare. Were that all, he might as well be a Republican. He might enjoy the experience of tribal warfare, but he cannot from this determine on which side to cast his lot. He is, then, a Democrat by conviction.

It might be said that politics are regional or exist in bubbles. A person is a Democrat because those around him are Democrats. This, of course, is a matter of experience and education. Those around him are Democrats, so he too is a Democrat—but still by conviction.

Once a Democrat, he might enjoy the experience of tribal warfare. This is perhaps unfortunate. He might also feel compelled to engage in tribal warfare, wrongly or rightly. Of course to fight for one’s convictions is hardly tribal. But to shun Republicans may be tribal. On the other hand, if a Democrat feels such is his duty, is this tribalism or an error of judgement? To think that those with convictions opposite one’s own are evil, and deserve to be hounded from human society, is far too rational a belief to be merely instinctual. But the element of tribalism that is specifically tribal is instinctual. (We are following the academics in our use of the word. There is a distinctly rational element in tribalism, but the academics discount that, and so do we.) Of course the belief, rooted in charity, that even those with convictions opposite one’s own are worthy of love is rational and voluntary, not instinctual. Thus reason is the thing, not instinct. The question is not how to address tribalism, but what to rationally believe.

There are unique pleasures that accompany every ethical choice. There is a pleasure in hating, individuals or tribes, that may be instinctual in some sense. There is a pleasure in charity as well. There are even unique pleasures in indifference, as experienced by the academics we have spoken of. Since man is not a creature simply pulled about by his desires and aversions, hopes and fears—pleasures and pains—the main question is how shall man rationally commit himself. Shall he choose the higher or lower pleasure?

Our course thus far leads us to another interesting point. Why is it that there is now an outbreak of tribalism? For though human nature is uniform, history is not. The condition of society varies from time to time and place to place. Certain events are singular. The French Revolution occurred in 1789; the Russian in 1917. Marxism erupted as a rash upon the face of the earth in the twentieth century. The radical left broke out on the skin of American society in the 1960s, and has plunged and surfaced repeatedly since then. How do we explain the singularity of these events?

We take for granted that there are forces that influence human history. Let us not mention God’s providence, which encompasses all.

Human nature: Human nature is for the most part common to all men, and is fixed, only varying in expression with man’s variable condition. A proper discussion of history presupposes human nature, which underlies the accidental realities imposed on it, but since history is not uniform, it also shows the forces that express or repress different aspects of human nature, and direct the course of history. Tribalism belongs to human nature, but when it is expressed more now than then, we must ask why.

Material or natural forces: Material forces are mostly fixed. However, a sudden timely catastrophe or other natural event may change history. And material forces form the physical setting of the stage on which our rational actions are conducted. The strategic placement of a fort or city may decide a momentous battle. The natural resources of a nation may impel it to the extent of empire. The windings of a river may alter the windings of history, and the obstruction of a mountain may obstruct the progress of fate. But it is also true that human agency changes the material world, thereby indirectly affecting history. Man is an animal that alters the physical terms of his condition. Material forces, in modern America, do little to sustain tribalism, except as they have to do with economic forces.

Human agency: By human agency we mean reason and will, which of course have much to do with each other. Reason depends on will, since one may choose to seek the truth or one’s immediate inclination. And will depends on reason, since one always wills what one rationally thinks best. When we say that history is in our hands, we mean that there are theoretically no limits to what human agency can accomplish. But on average, reason and will tend to even out according to the laws of probability. We do not expect exemplary action from the race—and we can fairly predict how people on average will act under certain conditions.

Still, certain momentous acts of reason and will at a place where the paths of history diverge illustrate the general truth that, as a race, we do have a choice where we are going. There are acts of will that run counter to the grain, or otherwise involve an unusually strong element of choice. At times of change or crisis, the concrete decisions of the leadership class are important. With different leaders reasoning differently and making different choices, there would have been no First World War, and modernity would have turned out different. Quite often, what matters more than the choices leaders do make is the choices they do not. Inaction is as important as action. And let us not forget the choices of anyone whose direct actions have altered history, be they philosophers, pamphleteers, educators of any kind.

Educators alter or affect history by means of ideas. Ideas are the general beliefs and ways of thought that guide the direction of history. They have to do with universal philosophy, rather than pressing momentary problems. Ideas are one of the most powerful forces in human history. Ideas truly have consequences, for ideas, as they vary through history, decide many great events of history, and usually decide the general course of history. Bad ideas often prey on a vulnerable aspect of human nature, whereas good ideas fulfill human nature.

Ideas spread or not depending on with what success they infiltrate the education system. Or we might speak of the “economics of distribution” more broadly. At one time pamphlets were instrumental in disseminating ideas. Institutions, such as churches, may be hijacked to do the same. Churches, families especially, and other educative institutions, may also serve as bulwarks against new ideas. However, with enough legal and political savvy, they may be compromised.

Whether ideas are spread or not often depends on the intensity of conviction, an attribute of their inherent nature and relation to circumstance. The strength of opposition, prevailing conditions, and other accidental circumstances facilitate or hinder their spread. But to effect a revolution in anything, it is sufficient to take over the means of education.

Economic forces: We mean by economic forces the forces of mass behavior, which are very powerful. They depend on reason and will, material forces, human nature, and so forth. But we set them apart because they relate to the interaction between the reason and will and conditions of many, and are, therefore, to a certain extent independent of the reason and will and conditions of individuals. The commerce of men and nations, the movements of men, the relative and absolute riches and poverty of men and nations, &c. all fall under the designation “economic forces.”

These are a few of the forces that influence, determine, and in some sense are the course of history. Of course they have much to do with each other, one affecting another, this affecting a third.

Since tribalism is an element of human nature, the innate tribal impulse is universal. However, not all times are equally tribal. Therefore, the impulse may be overcome. In order to explain an outbreak of tribalism, we must use the language of reason and ideas—of human agency and philosophy. We must also mention economic forces.

Ideas: Of course the prevalence of certain ideas, and paucity of others, contributes to the rise of tribalism. For instance, as religion has declined, social gnosticism has come into its own. Man needs some form of religious expression. And we may speak of modern philosophy generally. Modern philosophy is individualistic and breeds disrespect for order—and man thus made lonely and ungrateful is prepared to join the mob in a spirit of protest. The philosophy of liberalism has produced a generation of individuals with no prior convictions, who are thus susceptible to extreme beliefs, and therefore tribalism. These people have not even any healthy sentiments (such as patriotism, respect for religion, &c.) that might serve as warning signals when their tribe has gone too far.

Education: Ideas are propagated through education. Or they are notable for not being propagated. Any general attitude that can be pointed to as a cause of tribalism, either for being there or for being not, is usually there or not because of education—for instance, patriotism. Virtue, the greatest check to tribalism, is propagated or not through education. In the end, any reason we can point to why man has become tribal has to do with education. We might say that modern man is tribal because he has not been civilized. Why has he not been civilized? Because our society has ceased to civilize him, in homes, schools, or by means of general influence (thus we see that education encompasses more than formal schooling).

Economic forces: Economic forces may be described to a certain extent by mathematical laws, but also with reference to material forces, human nature, reason and will. When we blame tribalism on anything other than human agency and ideas, we usually blame it on economic forces. Of course economic forces describe human agency spread out over many individuals, adapting their actions to one another and to the world. This is not mere quibbling. There is a great difference between capitalism founded on the so-called “Protestant ethic” of hard work, frugality, integrity, &c., and capitalism founded on greed. Or can we compare the French aristocracy in 1789 to the English? Individual virtue is in many ways prior to economics. And economic systems are maintained according to ideas. So there is no use speaking of economic forces without reference to voluntary human beings, though they certainly may contribute to the rise of tribalism.

It might seem that I have conceded my main point away. I have said that economic forces, though depending on human agency and ideas, may contribute to the rise of tribalism. Let us take an example. Mass immigration has tended to destabilize societies over time. Destabilized societies are susceptible to tribalism. Although mistaken ideas gave sanction to mass immigration, still, was not mass immigration the cause of tribalism? But mass immigration tends to occur when a society has already gone soft. Humanitarian softness and loss of will to survive, though not wholly independent of economics, are well within human control. Humanitarianism may even lead to excessive welfare benefits that encourage immigration. Unassimilated immigrants especially tend to destabilize society. But immigrants are not made to assimilate in a decaying culture that has lost its sense of identity and purpose.

Similarly, economic regression, a flagging middle class, inequality of income—these are things permitted by an indolent society—a society with the wrong, or without the right, ideas—a society wanting virtue. Every economic excuse for tribalism, even be it a product of too much luxury, in the end comes down to human agency. In other words, we have no one to blame but ourselves. Economic forces are important (thus the superiority of the English aristocracy to the French is due in part to the relative early poverty of England among the nations of Western Europe), but are subject to our control, and are not the sole determining factor in history.

It would be too simplistic to blame any one cause for tribalism. The reasons for it are complex, but we must look to them, not to the raw instinct of tribalism itself. Why do we have the radical left now of all times? It is not because man has suddenly, after years of history, become an ape. Even if he has become an ape, we still must ask why, of all times, now?

The radical left in America did not pop out of nowhere, any more than did radicalism in eighteenth century France. The rise of a movement in both cases must be explained primarily with reference to a combination of the spread of certain ideas and attitudes, often by very skillful propaganda, as well as (especially in America) the remarkable legal and political savvy of the radicals, with some economic causes, perhaps at a time ripe for radicalism, and all unhindered by effective opposition. Any tribalism in the opposition to the radical left in America may be explained with reference to the radical left. In other words, they started it.

Tribalism in modern-day America can only be explained with reference to political division, along the lines of ideas. Ideas have consequences. Therefore, the war of ideas must be fought. To assume that all sides fight in good faith is naive. So is it to assume that all sides desire peace. One side may have revolutionary goals. Or the ideas of one side may have provoked a reaction, sparking the flames of “tribal” warfare. Anyone who refuses to take part in this “battle for the soul of the nation” is irrelevant.

Our current political turmoil is often explained in terms of tribalism as a governing trait of universal human psychology. “Tribalism” as shibboleth gives way to “tribalism” as pseudo-science. For instance, there is the analysis of prehistory (evolutionary history), which is quite speculative, and not at all helpful. (“Take it easy everyone. You don’t hate Republicans because they are evil, you hate them because long, long ago, a certain mammalian ancestor of yours was selected for a certain trait…a later ancestor developed a certain instinct…We know none of this, but we can guess.” Or, “Well, you see, your great-great-ancestor _Therapsida_…” It is like astrology. “No, of course. You are not angry because he carelessly trod on your foot, you are angry because the star sign Sagittarius is today in perfect alignment with…)

It is no good looking to prehistory to explain the singularities of our time. It is better to look to history. We must explain the phenomena of history with reference to the history that came before. Then we can find the root of the problem and pull it up (or at least stay sane ourselves).

There is also the method of analysis that uses temperament as the basis for political belief. This is mistaken on many levels. First of all, it entirely disregards the question of truth—the question of who is right. It is based on a view of things adopted by some scientists, in which unity and agreement matter to the exclusion of truth. However, even if we put aside the matter of man’s desire to live according to truth, we see that certain ideas tend to provoke reactions. Certain ideas lead from initial unity to disunity. Thus identity politics are unsustainable. Some ideas are fundamentally divisive. We also see that ideas have consequences in the world. It would be horrible to be united around socialism. Thus it matters very much what ideas we have, much less why we have them.

Of course, though I am not an expert in the science of psychology, I can see that either people’s politics vary depending on much more than temperament, or temperament is not fixed. For instance, we know statistically that politics vary by geographical region, whether one lives in city or country, generation, income, education (and not merely degree of education, but kind), and a variety of other factors, which have nothing to do with any fixed immutable temperament.

Certainly politics vary by time. In the Middle Ages, Christianity was a universal force. It was, so to speak, pan-temperamental. And the Christian outlook was the primary determining force in politics as in everything else. Certain ways of thought prevailed at the American Founding, which no longer prevail. Thus again, we see that politics vary independent of fixed temperament. And if temperament is not fixed it is almost irrelevant. We then say once more that life experience shapes a person, and ask, what kind of people do we want, and what kind of a society do we want? But this is a political question. If temperament drives circumstance, that is one thing; if circumstance changes temperament, we ought to play with circumstance.

It is not necessary to say that everyone in the Middle Ages was a Christian due to individual reason, or that everyone at the Founding thought the way they did because of reason. We need only say that Christianity and the ways of thought prevalent at the Founding, and those prevalent now, for that matter, may be discussed in rational language. It is not necessary for everyone to know the reason for a certain belief. It suffices that some people know.

Rational beliefs and forces determined by reason are far more important to discuss than mere temperament. Thus various psychological gimmicks are used to explain the election of Donald Trump. But Donald Trump could not have been elected at any other point in American history. Perhaps Trump’s election was a psychological reaction to certain real forces in the world. I do not think it was psychological. Trump won because there were real problems with our system that needed to be addressed, not because red state psychology suddenly ran amok. History elected Donald Trump, not the disgust centers of the brain, or what have you. Concrete realities elected Donald Trump, not the numbers that scientists tease from the brain in laboratories, thus fooling themselves into thinking that they understand people. But regardless, even if temperament or universal psychology elected Trump, the point is whether that was a good thing or a bad thing, and that is not a question that can be answered with psychology.

We must make a serious effort to engage with reality. The practice of psychological imperialism is an amusing pastime for many—but enough with it, if we are to understand human beings, and pursue truth.
