---
layout: post
title: "On Division"
description: "The idea that division is our greatest problem in America is itself absurd..."
---

The idea that division is our greatest problem in America is itself absurd. The radical left is our greatest problem, and division is our greatest source of comfort and hope. Were we not divided, who knows where we would be. I wish we were more divided.

However, with the lamentations over division inevitably come the predictable solution: namely, that we all realize that everyone, on all sides of the political “debate,” has some piece of the truth, and that, therefore, it is in the interest of all that we come together, share our wisdom, and compromise. Left and right alike have something to offer; and by splitting the difference between them, we shall reconcile division, and our country will move forward united to brighter and more distant horizons.

Needless to say, when one side is intransigent, this sort of talking does not do much good. The conservative is apt, as he clings desperately to his side of the rope, striving to win the political and cultural tug-of-war, while the vultures of division prognosticate and advise; he is apt to glance up for a moment, and cry, wildly, “Certainly let us compromise; that is fine by me; but tell that to _him_,” then return to his rope as it almost slips from his hands. The point is, compromise implies that all sides both have the capacity to be reasonable and want to be reasonable. Since, in our time, that is not the case, we have no choice but to fight—to seek truth, not unity. The radical left has no intention of compromising, even if it sometimes finds it expedient to use the language of compromise, or moderate its demands, in order to scale them up incrementally in the future. Any compromise with the radical left is not a compromise but a defeat.

The idea that everyone has good intentions, that everyone is honestly desirous of truth is a falsehood, probably taking the character of willful delusion. Political debate has never been, and certainly is not now, an honest process of seeking truth. Therefore, the best thing is to be on the right side, or at the very least on the rightest side. The radical left wants power, not truth; therefore it can only be fought power with power—and may the power that has truth on its side win.

It is obvious to any insightful observer that we are witnessing an existential struggle between the forces of radical leftism and everyone else. To talk about compromise and moderation is, we can only conclude, naive and useless. All it can do is render one an impotent observer on the sidelines, clutching one’s hair and squawking about moderation in a voice drowned out by the sound of sword on sword.

It is certainly eminently silly, at the moment, to talk about compromise and bridging over the partisan divide. That is how divided our country is. For division can become so extreme, that it ceases to be division over degree, and becomes division over the basic validity of certain concepts.

For instance, for all intents and purposes, the “debate” over immigration at the moment is not over degree of acceptable or unacceptable legal or illegal immigration. It is over the very validity of the concept of borders. That is it: it makes it easy for one to decide. Do we admit that a nation has a basic interest in securing its borders, however much, or do we not?

So the “debate” over race. So the “debate” over equality. Are we to affirm the equality of individuals or the guilt of collectives? So the “debate” over socialism. Whatever a more moderate Democrat might be inclined to tell you, we are deciding whether socialism has a place in America or not. So the “debate” over free speech; over the right to self-defense. So the “debate” over almost every given issue. We are so utterly divided, it is idiotic to talk about compromise, moderation, or bridging over the chasm. The only expedient is, not to compromise, but to win.

And obviously these issues can only issue in a victory for one side or the other. Either we admit the validity of borders or we do not: if we do, one side has won; if we do not, the other. (And there are only ever two sides in an internal crisis.) If we admit the equality and the rights of individuals (the rule of law), there is no question of compromise: one side has already won.

Indeed, the only “debate” in today’s society is between the active nihilists who only want to destroy, as well as their legion tribes of useful idiots that come to their aid, and those who do not want to destroy. This might be re-framed in terms of power. In any revolution, there is an element of joy in destruction, which is active nihilism. There is also a sense of meaning conveyed to the nihilists—if one cannot build, let one purposively destroy. But there is too the desire of the revolutionaries for power. Indeed, though the inconsistencies of the left are often pointed out, they will not be seen to be inconsistent, if we once realize that many of them are resolved in a dialectic of power. Sometimes this power game devolves into mere petty squabbling. But when guided by a consistent force, one must realize that there is fearful consistency in the actions of the left. The endpoint and goal of leftism is not social justice but leftist hegemony.

Granted that the majority of Americans would not support the radical left if they understood it, we are locked in a struggle to determine the future of our country (to say the least). The radical left is a serious threat—an existential threat to anyone who finds it repugnant, and to most everyone else besides, with the exception of those who are so politically versatile as to be able to stay abreast of the tide for sustained periods of time. At the moment, the struggle is largely a war of ideas, and partly a war fought according to legitimate political processes. But if the radical left wins, and make no mistake of it, it has been a rising swell for over sixty years, now in a position to submerge civilization completely, the war will take on an entirely different character. The left will consolidate its power, and exert that power to its utmost, and any resistance will be swiftly acquainted with the full extent of radical leftist law. The struggle will cease to be conducted on a level, democratic playing field; the left will have appropriated the reigns of power, and will intend to keep them.

Needless to say, I digress. But it is to seek solace in the oblivion of infancy, to think that the political division in our country is not so fundamental as to render impossible all hope of compromise, and render necessary the marshaling of all troops to the field.

This truth might be arrived at from any number of angles. I have perhaps taken a clumsy direction to it. It might be easier to say, one cannot argue with ideologues, one can only fight and defeat them.
