---
layout: post
title: "A Vindication of Personal Reason"
description: "In our generation, many people fall for the most patent lies, and one might well wonder why..."
---

In our generation, many people fall for the most patent lies, and one might well wonder why. This problem meets easy resolution in the minds of certain scientific individuals, according to whom we are none of us capable of bringing the truth to bay.

Experience militates against this absurdity. Some have clear eyes, some do not. We ourselves feel we are capable of choosing to pursue truth or illusion. Some see the radical left as it is, some do not. This disparity of reason and imagination may be due to education; for we do not pursue truth in a vacuum, but must be humbly educated into the great tradition of Western learning, in order to see clearly. Anything else is indoctrination. A proper education gives us a sound basis of conviction, which appears to be necessary for clear vision. It is a great mystery, but a prerequisite to reason is prior dogma. Rational people with no convictions often prove to be wrong. Of course some are simply educated to possess some truth, though they have not come into a personal relationship with truth. They do not understand it; it is a dead thing to them.

But certainly some individuals choose to pursue truth, others do not. Yet the scientific individuals insist that we are all equally incapable of rational thought. It is proper that they should, for their whole lives are predicated on that notion. They have never sought Truth itself, and are not aware it can be done. They then distrust truth found by others who have sought it.

They think we must resort to certain props in our reasoning process. These are “free discussion and debate,” as well as the scientific method. Both replace the personality of reasoning with an impersonal method.

The advantages of both are obvious. “Free discussion and debate” permits us to profit by the wisdom of others. The scientific method is one instrument to be used in the personal pursuit of truth. In its proper place, there can be no objection to it.

But the dangers of both methods are also apparent. Anyone who uses a method to arrive at truth is in danger of hiding behind it. He is no longer personally responsible for the conclusion he reaches. And so, counter-intuitively, he is free to reach any conclusion he likes. He is convinced that he is impartial, and may, therefore, be more partial than ever. “Outsourcing”—to use a hateful modern word—his reasoning to the “crowd,” he siphons off ideas selectively, and combines them according to his own algebra. Thus we see a favorite trick employed by prominent traditional liberals. They pretend to draw ideas from across the “political spectrum,” but in doing so, lock themselves into a part of it. Their final combination has its own discrete philosophical being, which may be opposed to other philosophies. One may be a dogmatic liberal, then change one’s mind, and become a dogmatic conservative. But one who pretends to take ideas from liberals, conservatives, libertarians, &c., what is he? Probably a liberal with a relatively open mind—and thus still set firmly against conservatives. Sometimes it is a zero-sum game between philosophies. There is no getting around the war of ideas. One cannot reason within the framework of traditional liberalism, then pretend one’s reason is universal.

How truer is this in even deeper philosophical or religious matters. There is no hope of compromise between utilitarianism and Christianity. Any compromise would be on utilitarian terms. Catholicism and Protestantism may have common ground, but they also have very uncommon ground, whereon war must be fought, and there is no hope of compromise. Catholic dogma cannot be half right. Protestantism is generous because it is fuzzy and vague. So for liberalism; so for utilitarianism. Any apparent compromise between these and more rigorous systems is no compromise at all, but a victory for the less rigorous and manly system. A philosophical compromise between Catholicism and Protestantism is impossible. What then ought we to say about a proposed compromise between Christianity and Atheism? It is the silliest thing in the world—and probably the saddest, too.

The scientific method is attended with its own dangers. We ought not to speak of the use of “science” as a political bludgeon. According to “science,” everyone is always right who appeals to it. And how much more right are those who are bipartisan (or better! nonpartisan), read all sides of everything, consult the science with a disposition to learn, synthesize information from myriad sources, pride themselves on their freedom from bias and thus error, and reach a conclusion uniquely their own?

At any rate, trust in the “scientific method” to the exclusion of other instruments of reason involves a suspension of judgment that is an invitation to error, and is unscientific. Trust in the scientific method, too, often lapses into blind trust in authority. For instance, we are told to “trust science” with regard to the covid-19 virus, though a proper application of judgement would show the “science” partisan and corrupt. It is remarkable that some individuals who have never studied a bit of science in their lives prove more consistently right about such matters than the world’s leading scientists, or the all-around experts educated in universities. It is a matter of judgement.

And what are we to say to a person who proudly applies the scientific method to matters of religion? Or to the aggregation of a universal philosophy? Even to the facts and issues? Thus a scientific, nonpartisan individual might tell us that the political violence which has swept our nation of late has been confined mostly to a few blocks in a few cities. He would then proceed to lament the death of George Floyd, one man. Thus he is using “science” and “objectivity” as an excuse for his own partisanship. If he says, not that many people have been injured or killed or bereft of property in the recent rioting, I respond, far fewer innocent black men have been killed by police officers. Besides, he is not concerned with the rioting; science proves it is a relatively small matter; but the fact that he is not concerned is concerning. The moment a society loses its will to survive, the moment it is no longer horrified by disorder and destruction and vilification of and attacks on its law enforcement, the moment it countenances mob rule, it is well on the way to committing suicide. One must exercise one’s judgment. To hide behind method is to seek there an excuse for partisan error.

Both forms of faith in method are blind faith in method. I have seen this faith. The person who thinks “there is truth on both sides” (when as often as not there is not) gives error a foot in the door, and is but one step away from becoming a relativist. Agreement and compromise are sought, not truth. This is the person inclined to admit that “the mob has a point,” when the mob has no such thing. Thus he robs himself of the moral capital to resist the mob.

The scientific individuals secure to themselves undue respect (I do not say they do it deliberately), by professing to root out error in their own opinions. They pursue truth rigorously. They are not dogmatic. It appears that anyone who is dogmatic must not have sought truth prior to dogma, but had the dogma first, as they suggest. Thus it is the same old fallacy. “Free-thinkers” are not free-thinkers because of _how_ they think, but of _what_ they think. Only “bipartisans” are not dogmatically attached to their partisanship prior to forming their political convictions. It is taken for granted that anyone who arrives at definite conclusions must be biased from the start. But the case is misunderstood. Dogma is not prior to reason; reason is prior to dogma. One must have convictions to reason, but one must also reason to have convictions.

But the scientific individuals gain credence by saying that anyone who has not looked into matters with great “objectivity” equal to theirs is probably wrong. Thus they discredit their opponents, and plant the seeds of doubt in their listeners and readers. They tell us if we do not actively seek to counteract the “confirmation bias” that preys on us all, our conclusions will be hopelessly subjective. Sometimes it is remarkable to hear them talk. One would think the whole universe is conspiring to hoodwink us. Trust not your senses, they tell us, lest they lead you into error. However, I think we ought to take the universe in good faith. It is not really trying to fool us. We commit many errors in interpretation, but we are capable of seeking truth with honest intent, and success.

We are told that our psyche is structured so as to render rational thought almost impossible. Therefore, the way to seek truth is to use the scientific method, or listen to the scientists. However, the scientific method may be valid in scientific matters, but outside of science it is unnecessary.

The fact is, if we wish to discover truth, we must earnestly desire it. It is a matter of personal choice. On any matter of importance—or, let us say especially, on _many_ matters of importance—no one can be perfectly neutral and objective in methodology. But we can take what the world throws at us, seek more information, and by choosing truth over illusion come into the possession of truth. One sees people on the left grow uncomfortable upon being presented with evidence that weighs against them. They immediately avert their eyes. They do not want to know the truth. Others make the choice to read history, study ideas, and so forth. They do not shy away from experience that might prove them wrong.

As I said, it is necessary to have some prior dogmas, to moor any subsequent discovery on, in order to be truly objective. One might subsequently reject those dogmas, but the pursuit of truth is a personal, not scientific, process. Once truth is discovered, it is necessary to transmit it to the next generation. It ought to be passed on as truth, not opinion. The function of education is not to expose students to all possible beliefs. Marxism is not a contender on the plane of truth, and ought not to be given students as such. Besides, when students are given a non-dogmatic education, usually there are words between the lines. They are educated into the prevailing views of the “educated” class. They become skeptics, liberals, utilitarians, social justice warriors, or something else pathetic like that.

It is said that, since we as individuals are incapable of pursuing truth, it is necessary to have a marketplace of ideas allowing truth to flourish. Thus free speech is the impersonal method by which we attain truth. Of course truth cannot flourish in a society in which it is repressed. But the idea that free speech is a solution to our individual incapacity to discover truth is nonsense.

There are only two ways for truth to naturally arise out of a marketplace of competing voices: somehow, magically, society collectively accepts the truth that “emerges” out of free speech; or individuals listening to, and taking part in the exchange of ideas adopt the right ideas. The first is bad mysticism, or cultic, I suppose. The second must be the way. But then individuals, contrary to our starting premise, must be able to discover truth as individuals. True, they are taught by others, but in the end truth is found in the heads of individuals. And the responsibility falls to individuals to listen, to be open-minded, to be taught by others, and to discover truth on their own.

It then becomes obvious that, contrary to what is claimed, individuals are able to discover truth on their own, otherwise no one can. And the main condition is that the individual must genuinely want it. The conscious objectivity of the scientific method, and an ongoing “dialogue” are useful tools for the individual, but ultimately it is the individual who discovers truth, then passes it on to the next generation.

This is not to say there is no place for method, when used in good faith. But as it is used, it ultimately leads to equivocation, and submission to the personal judgement of those who counsel caution, giving the appearance of neutrality. Or it leads to suspension of judgment, and error. Or to defeat before the campaign has begun.
