---
layout: post
title: "What the Future Holds"
description: "As we await, with bated breath, skepticism but hope, or pompous assurance, as the case may be, the revelations of Rudy Giuliani and Sydney Powell, it is timely to ask what the future holds..."
---

As we await, with bated breath, skepticism but hope, or pompous assurance, as the case may be, the revelations of Rudy Giuliani and Sydney Powell, it is timely to ask what the future holds. We hope they are not lying brazenly, and have no reason to think they would, but even if the “Kraken” proves a mythical beast, or circumstance otherwise conspires to elect Iosef Biden to the presidency, the consequences of nearly everything in these consequential times will have a dramatic effect on our predictions, and a decisive effect on the future.

Momentum in American politics has been all on the side of the progressives for decades. Since the 1960s, radicals have been marching through our institutions virtually unchecked. True, conservatives have raised a great hue and cry, but we look around at our situation today, and see to what avail it was. The election of President Trump in 2016 was a hopeful sign, but many indicators point nevertheless toward decline, catastrophe, or a stable regime established on hateful premises and persecuting truth unto many years hence.

It is our purpose to thresh out a few of the possible futures that await us. Almost every major institution in America is controlled by liberals, progressives, and radicals. Because the police are as yet conservative, they must be attacked and defunded. We can expect the leftists to attempt a takeover of Sheriffs’ offices, which at times are among the most effective impediments to their rule. Republicans are useful in resisting them insofar as they fight. Otherwise, their role is equivalent to that of Socrates’ interlocutors in the dialogues of Plato—to provide a foil for the inevitable triumph of contrary truth.

We need not be overly scrupulous in our definitions, since it is events and concrete future regimes with which we are concerned. It is more useful—for our purposes—to examine the tendencies of our times than to demarcate the population according to ideology or philosophy. There is very little need to define liberalism here. It is well understood, and the reader may examine James Burnham’s _Suicide of the West_, for instance, to better understand it. Liberalism, and the stream of modern philosophy of which it is a part, may be blamed for much that is wrong with the modern world. But that is a subject for a different essay.

Liberals (of various stripes) are increasingly irrelevant, not a powerful enough force, nor likely to become one again, to factor into our considerations. We say this with two qualifications. First, progressivism, being a derivation of liberalism, and being in continuous progress, retains much in common with liberalism. Secondly, liberals are frightfully relevant to the extent that they prevent adequate resistance to progressivism and radicalism. Left-liberals usually support progressives and radicals, and right-liberals bow down before them.

Progressivism is difficult to define; for its essence (is it not?) is that it is always changing. This is not quite true, for progressivism “progresses” along a predictable path defined by the course of “modern philosophy.” Progressives are elitists with ambitions of power, who wish to impose lies on all of us, and destructive policies on the inferior classes. We shall have more to do with them presently.

Liberals have much in common with progressives, and progressives with radicals. Radicals exert pressure on liberal and progressive institutions to gain control. They are distinctive in that they embrace full economic socialism, or practically so, and are not cynical but have passionate ideals. They wish to stage a revolution, whereas progressives wish to consolidate their power.

We are aware of the immediate consequences of elections. But if we turn our eyes to the future, we notice the more distant consequences of the political decisions of our time. These decisions nor consequences are not so distant as many might have imagined or hoped five or ten years ago. It becomes daily more obvious that we live at a critical point in history, and that the decisions we make over the immediately ensuing years will bear fruit over a much longer span of time. Something so momentary as the election of Joe Biden and two Democrats to the Senate in Georgia may have foreseen or unforeseen consequences.

If we imagine for a moment that in the future we shall hold our course, and progressivism will triumph without resistance, we have our starting assumption of where we are headed. Progressives intend to consolidate their power over American institutions. But radicals also intend to subvert their power structures and stage a revolution. And most political observers prognosticate by examining the unimpeded course of an ideology, but also by examining all possible reactions. Ideologies provoke reactions because they are radical and unpopular, inherently “divisive” in rhetoric, have real effects in the world that require correction. It is also useful to examine what elements in a system will have what effect in the future. Thus at present, liberals, progressives, radicals, and populist conservatives constitute the main forces in our dynamic system. Liberalism is a “conservative” force that can have no effect but a negative on the future; and the most effect it can have is to render the forces of good tame, and obscure the true intent of the forces of evil. Progressives seem to have control over the future, but radicals have great power as well; the line between them is blurred, and partly defined by “outsider” or “insider” status. Many Republicans are impotent liberals. The populist movement of Donald Trump is a powerful force as well.

When progressives take office, we can be sure they will raise taxes and increase regulations, appoint progressive judges, infringe on gun rights, expand the right to abortion. They will release criminals, cripple police forces, and crime will rise. They will pursue weak globalist foreign policy. They will favor illegal immigration, cater to corporate America, and permit the heightening of income inequality. (Republicans are not guiltless in these last few respects.) They will otherwise pursue policies tending to the disintegration of the social fabric.

And they will otherwise pursue policies that tend to the consolidation of their power. They will remove barriers to one-party rule. They will vitiate the Constitution. They will pack the electorate with immigrants, pack the Senate by giving statehood to D.C. and Puerto Rico, and pack the Supreme Court. They will abolish the Electoral College. They will abolish the filibuster in the Senate. They would probably like to systematize voter fraud, and use it to win elections into perpetuity. They will give sanction to further lies by the media and censorship by big tech. They will support the regulation of speech. They will reward power to institutions that are favorable to their ambitions. They will take away individual liberties, and condition individuals to rest complacent within the limits of a very narrow freedom. They will continue to use institutions and compromised individuals to enforce compliance. They will use economic destruction to crush intransigent demographics. They will further politicize the justice system. And so on, and so forth.

The completion of this list would require something on the scale of revolution, and will be attained only upon the completion of civil war, fought more or less strenuously. The great ambition of progressives is power, the establishment of a permanent political class that can never be questioned again, and narrow freedom for their fellow Americans. The great tendency of progressivism is toward the establishment of a walled playground, in which America are free as far as their freedom goes, but not at all free beyond that. They must affirm the established orthodoxy, and live according to the prescribed rules, with some meaningless license afforded. “License,” not freedom, for freedom to live according to truth will be not, and Christians in particular will be persecuted. This will be achieved via technology, after the Chinese model, under Chinese tutelage, and even under the wing of China. The unreasonable Rod Dreher has written at length about this, calling it “soft totalitarianism,” though I have not read his books.

There are two elements to progressive rule of this sort: the first is power and persecution, the second destructive policies. For progressive policies are destructive. Thus they set the stage for further revolution. Progressives facilitate revolution by vitiating our Constitution and our institutions. They attack the moral fiber of America, and sow “division” with irresponsible rhetoric, at least for the present. They damage the social fabric by releasing criminals to rend it, welcoming illegal immigrants, wreaking economic destruction. Thus progressive policies fail abysmally, and the stage is set for revolution. Already radicals are exerting pressure on the media and other institutions, and control the universities. (Of course we must remember that a progressive is really only a cynical radical.) Radicals and progressives share immediate ends. But progressives intend oligarchy by the global progressive elite, whereas radicals intend revolution. And if progressives remove all checks to revolution, and tear the social fabric into feathers, revolution becomes probable.

Radicals would destroy our economy, and buckle down more and more as it collapsed. The tendency of their policies is toward socialism proper. They would use “climate change” as an excuse for their “transformation” of the economy. And totalitarianism would be much less soft under them. But they are unlikely to grab and hold power, so that the history of America is a repetition of the history of the Soviets. America is not Russia prior to the revolution. Nor are we France prior to theirs. And most analogies of the sort fail. Rather, the radicals may well destroy the country, and initiate a period of rapid decline. The economy will fall, partisan warfare will rise, perhaps even literal guerrilla or “irregular” warfare, and we shall battle in the ruins of civilization unto further and further decline. Radicalism of all sorts will ravage the land. And perhaps a man on horseback will emerge, after America becomes unrecognizable to our eyes, or perhaps some other end result of crisis. But chaos will continue, and America’s days as the greatest power will be over. These things are hard to predict.

A second wave of radicalism is only likely to follow on a first wave of radical progressivism. But another sort of reaction is possible. The best chance for populism (after the character of the Trump movement) is in the present and immediate future. Radical rhetoric, ideas, and policies provoke a reaction. But populism is more an alternative to “radicalism” than a reaction against it. Both populism and radicalism are reactions against liberalism and establishment progressivism. Populism, in particular, is a reaction against globalism. (When we use the terms “radicalism” and “populism” we are referring to a particular radical movement of the left and a particular populist movement of the right.)

A populist ascendancy would look like the Trump movement, and would cause a fundamental rightward shift and realignment of the country. This, needless to say, is the only hope for conservatives—a “spontaneous” cultural shift.

But if we look to the culture, we see that conservative are in great trouble. We have lost the culture war, as virtually every major institution is controlled by the left.

The three primary sources of revolution are ideas, economic realities, and “instability” generally. Economic reform can avert a revolution, but where an unstable society is filled with radical rhetoric and steeped in certain nihilistic ideas, it is perhaps too late. Nor is reform always possible in the face of extreme and unreasonable demands. One may, however, cripple public support for radicalism with good government in an already prospering society. But at the moment, we must defeat radicalism. It is impossible to give in to the demands of the radicals, or recompense them for their frustrated lives thus far.

It is better for conservatives to defeat radicalism than for progressivism to offer a reasonable and moderate return to stability. We must remember that Russia was a revolutionary country for a time, but soon established its hateful regime. So it always is. If radicals are tearing down statues and erasing history, this may be no more than a vehicle for the “progressive revolution.” Thus we have most to fear, not from socialism as initiated by radicals, but from a combined effort by radicals and progressives to give progressives a fundamentally non-revolutionary sort of power. Radicals will be cheated of their due, but they will certainly help usher in the “New Order.” Thus one must fight all one’s enemies tooth and nail—be they radicals (socialists), progressives, or liberals adding useful or useless mass to one side or the other.

It ought to be remembered that there is an affinity between radicalism and progressivism, because progressivism itself is radical—a terrifying thought.

We are living in a critical moment. Of course it is possible that the populist revolution will occur after the establishment of a progressive technocracy, or further along the way into it. But this is very dangerous, because such a technocracy, though probably unstable ultimately, could well last many decades, as did the Soviet Union, nor would normalcy return immediately upon its end.

It is always possible that man is moving toward his destruction. Our technological capacities could well get away from us and end our tenure on earth.

Some have little hope for America because they foresee a path of division unto radicalism, radicalism unto division, division unto decline or collapse. But I think there is hope—hope in victory. Conservatives must win the political wars of our time. The future is bleak if progressives or radicals win. In a fundamental and lasting rightward shift, in reaction to leftism of all sorts, and evincing the continuous good sense of Americans, our hope rests. This must of course be accompanied by, and perhaps partly initiate, the emergence of a new elite, which at this time seems not out of the realm of possibility. The culture war will be won when a Donald Trump wins the presidency at the same time as a host of Sohrab Ahmaris flood our institutions and gain influence.

Another possibility I have not mentioned is this: “moderate” _status quo_ politics unto decline and collapse. We mustn’t let establishment Democrats and Mitt Romneys control the future. But that seems unlikely. A new elite of sorts must emerge because the old one is crumbling. Thus the future belongs either to progressives who will consolidate their power and (probably) establish a technocracy (a word I am using imprecisely to mean a progressive regime using technology as an instrument of power, but also controlled at least in part by what we now call “big tech”), or the patriots and nationalists of whose presence we are certainly aware.

This is a haphazard attempt to map out the future.
