---
layout: post
title: "The Christian Perspective on Politics"
description: "As the liberal order crumbles apace, according to its fate, and as various philosophies arise amid the ruins, Catholic integralism being one of them, it is worth reminding ourselves of the properly Christian attitude to politics, which we believe is a clear matter of Christian teaching..."
---

As the liberal order crumbles apace, according to its fate, and as various philosophies arise amid the ruins, Catholic integralism being one of them, it is worth reminding ourselves of the properly Christian attitude to politics, which we believe is a clear matter of Christian teaching. Of course “Christian teaching” is an extensive category, but we refer to that core of Christian teaching which, as it is pared away in the pursuit of truth, is whittled into precisely the form of Catholicism, with all its knobs and eccentricities, and little extraneous matter.

The first question the Christian asks himself should always be, How do I live as a Christian, according to the light of truth, in the world. The world is a place of pilgrimage; and the temporal is nothing compared with the Eternal. A Christian life is inviolable by the state, insofar as obedience to Christ lies in the will of the individual.

Of course a whole Christian life on Earth—and remember, we are not speaking of Heaven but Earth—requires Communion and fellowship in the Church. Furthermore, the state may be unable to violate a Christian life, but it certainly can a Christian lifestyle. It can burn Bibles, ban open worship, &c. There are any number of laws that strike at Christianity.

The fate of Christianity is bound up in part with the fate of secular politics. From the Roman Empire to the Holy Wars to the Crusades, official recognition, war, conquest, have accompanied evangelism in determining Christianity’s temporal footing. Thus martyrdom in the face of a hostile regime is saintly and of eternal importance; martyrs are witnesses to the truth; but there is no guarantee that the second generation after the martyrs will hear their witness, and convert to Christianity, after the faith has been razed by persecution. A technocratic or other totalitarian regime which bars the way even to Christian teaching will eventually ensure that there are no Christians left.

Some laws strike at man as such. A regime hostile to the family is hostile to human nature, to man as a person, and so also to Christianity. If the Christian religion is true, the Christian description of human nature is true as well, and should be the basis even of a secular society with a Christian minority. Thus Christians should press their conception of man on society even as society’s is pressed on them.

The teachings and basic assumptions of Christianity have implications for secular politics. A regime organized around Christian principles is preferable, in itself, for Christians, and as being more stable than any sort of “post-Christian” regime founded on rationalistic principles and rapidly descending into anarcho-tyranny. But the Christian under a tolerable regime ought to be grateful, as every man ought to be. Nor does he require a Christian regime to live according to a faith that is not of this world.

It is certainly much more cheerful to know that one will live truthfully and righteously in the world regardless of circumstance, than to bemoan circumstance without consolation. Then the Christian may be grateful for what good is in the world. He may vote as a Christian, without bias against truth and the way of truth as he sees it—for absolute “tolerance” is a mere deception obscuring the triumph of atheism. He may even be politically active. This is dangerous ground, for where man’s heart is, there is his treasure.

It has been said that Christians have historically been too otherworldly—after all, what is the use of living on Earth for some years if one is to shun earthly things altogether? This, of course, is the cynic’s approach to theology—and if there is one thing we can be sure of, it is that cynicism has no place in true religion. However, we must admit that one cannot always be dreaming of Heaven while sleepwalking on Earth. Obedience to Christ must somehow infuse the Christian life. More precisely, Christ is the Mediator, coming between man and God and man and life, without replacing life. We must not make the mistake of thinking no lifestyle changes are necessary for the converted Christian. But nor must we fall into the opposite danger, of thinking there are no other appropriate objects for a Christian than meditation on Heaven and missionary work. Ordinary life of a sort is divine.

Ordinary life is political. The mere act of raising a family is political, and we see in it the embryo of Catholic political teaching, which is founded on the common good with regard to persons. The common good may be pursued on any level, from that of the family to the community to the nation to the universal Church. Pursuit of the common good is politics founded on love of neighbor. It is very different from the anxiety of secular politics.

The Christian may be involved in politics, but while preserving the distinction between Heaven and Earth. It seems to me that a fundamental text for Christian political understanding is St. Augustine’s _City of God_. To know that there are two cities, the City of Man and the City of God, and even that their interaction shapes history, but that they are fundamentally distinct, is necessary to understand the Christian’s place in politics.

And the third necessity is that the Christian have gratitude. All gratitude is due ultimately to God. The Christian should put his hope in eternity. And he should not too strongly lament the course of politics in history. This speaks attachment to temporal, transient cultures. It is a form of distrust in God’s providence. To lament the American Revolution for instance, as some radical traditionalists do, is to arrogate unto oneself the judgment of God. “All would be well had the Bonnie Prince Charlie only won the Battle of Culloden in 1746!” This is not the opinion of a conservative, traditionalist, or Christian of the most radical kind. True, providence brings good out of evil, but we should attempt to mirror this divine working, not lament the corruptions of history.

The Christian must not be a radical in politics, because radicalism is secular “gnosticism,” to use Eric Voegelin’s phraseology. It is to distrust God’s providence and take upon oneself the formation of history. Thus the Christian may lament the degeneracy of ideas, and even fundamentally object to the tendencies of the times, but without too strongly inserting himself into the historical flow.

And the Christian must preserve the distinction between the Church and the world. To live according to the light of truth for the Catholic is to live in the community of Christians that is the everlasting Church. “To represent the truth of the soul in the Christian sense is the function of the church, not of civil society” (Eric Voegelin). Perfection is not the province of the state. It should not be expected, because it is impossible. The state _will_ not be perfect, so man turns for what of perfection can be found on Earth to the Church.

I have tried to show what perspective the _truly_ traditional Christian will adopt toward politics. There is a form of _faux_ traditionalism, a sort of charming though deceptive iconoclasm, which would reject six hundred years of human history, and dabble in things of antiquarian interest, rather than put modernity on a firmer footing, thus restoring the _eternal_ to politics, which some Christians are in danger of falling into.
