---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry: Classicism and Modernism [Ⅵ]"
description: "It is not at this point perfectly clear in what respect Eliot’s poetry is modern..."
---

It is not at this point perfectly clear in what respect Eliot’s poetry is modern. Certainly its tendency is toward liberation and fragmentation, which might also be called nihilism. And certainly it is ugly. But let us examine what specifically distinguishes modern from classical poetry.

(We know that Eliot is a modernist, of course. The reader might then ask why it is necessary to probe into these questions. But we do not ask them for the purpose of proving definitively that Eliot is a modernist. We ask them for the purpose of demonstrating the poverty of modernism.)

It has been said that the essence of modernism is obscurity and the essence of classicism clarity. Classical poetry communicates so as to be understood. There is a right way to read it. No matter how florid, subtle, or intricate the language, no matter how many images or metaphors are used, the classical poem has a clear meaning, communicated by the poet to the reader. The modern poem, by contrast, is obscure in expression, so that the reader might interpret it a hundred different ways, and no way is necessarily right or wrong. Its allusions are ambiguous; its metaphors and images evocative; and its language generally surrounds its subject rather than narrowing in on it.

The classical poet finds himself in a rational universe. He finds obscure truths everywhere, which must be rendered clear through poetry, in a manner that delights. But the modern poet does not believe in truth. He finds himself in a chaotic universe, one in which obscure evocation is a means to feel ourselves to a truth we can never apprehend.

There is a danger among conservatives of adopting too mystical a view of life. But conservatives must fight tooth and nail against the view that truth is apprehensible only by indirect processes. To affirm history is fundamentally to affirm the truth that arises out of history. To affirm prejudice (inarticulate truths passed down through generations rather than articulate truths discerned by the rational individual) is to see the wisdom in prejudice. But the conservative is in the end a champion and defender of truth.

Let us attempt to understand Eliot’s modernism, and the view of life which it entails, by bringing forward bits and pieces from his seminal essay, “Tradition and the Individual Talent.” In this way, if the reader is interested in “quaffing from the source,” he will be able to easily begin, starting from the core, then expanding outwards, to gain a better understanding of Eliot’s mind insofar as it pertains to his work as poet, while continuing to read his poetry. As we do this, we may avail ourselves of insight gained from other sources.

He writes, “The business of the poet is not to find new emotions, but to use the ordinary ones and, in working them up into poetry, to express feelings which are not in actual emotions at all.” These new feelings have a life of their own in art. They are only real in the shared experience of the poet and reader, in relation to the whole of poetic history. But emotions are rendered fantastic once they have been transmuted into artistic feelings. A real emotion is something you can get a grasp on. An artistic feeling is fundamentally irrational, something that cannot be described.

In other words, “The effect of a work of art upon the person who enjoys it is an experience different in kind from any experience not of art. It may be formed out of one emotion, or may be a combination of several; and various feelings, inhering for the writer in particular words or phrases or images, may be added to compose the final result. Or great poetry may be made without the direct use of any emotion whatever: composed out of feelings solely.”

He continues, “If you compare several representative passages of the greatest poetry you see how great is the variety of types of combination [of emotions], and also how completely any semi-ethical criterion of ‘sublimity’ misses the mark. For it is not the ‘greatness,’ the intensity, of the emotions, the components, but the intensity of the artistic process, the pressure, so to speak, under which the fusion takes place, that counts.”

Thus we see already that art is an area of human existence which may and must be abstracted from other areas. It is the artistic process which fuses together the parts which compose the whole. Great art inhabits an interpersonal and intertemporal, artistic and historical, sphere of separate being.

But great poetry does not come of randomly spreading words and images across paper, then combining them with a retrospective match. Rather, the ultimate expression of the poetic endeavor is this: “When a poet’s mind is perfectly equipped for its work, it is constantly amalgamating disparate experiences; the ordinary man’s experience is chaotic, irregular, fragmentary. The latter falls in love, or reads Spinoza, and these experiences have nothing to do with each other, or with the noise of the type-writer or the smell of the cooking; in the mind of the poet these experiences are always forming new wholes.”[^1]

But this mystical mind of the poet does not come into being by mere chance. Rather than rely on his individual talent, it is the traditional poet who is able to act as the catalyst which combines elements into a new artistic whole. Tradition does not imply a blind adherence to the past. “Tradition is a matter of much wider significance. It cannot be inherited, and if you want it you must obtain it by great labour. It involves, in the first place, the historical sense…and the historical sense involves a perception, not only of the pastness of the past, but of its presence; the historical sense compels a man to write not merely with his own generation in his bones, but with a feeling that the whole of the literature of Europe from Homer and within it the whole of the literature of his own country has a simultaneous existence and composes a simultaneous order. This historical sense, which is a sense of the timeless as well as of the temporal and of the timeless and of the temporal together, is what makes a writer traditional.”

And so, what must happen to the poet “is a continual surrender of himself as he is at the moment to something which is more valuable. The progress of an artist is a continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality.” The poet abdicates his personality, in order to let diverse scraps fuse together, and the process is anchored in the historical sense of the poet.

This is enough for our purposes. I do not wish to provide a detailed analysis of Eliot’s theory—remember, this is a book grounded in common sense, the purpose of which is more to cut through theory than to weave it out elaborately then pick at the strings. It is enough for us to say that, regardless of what Eliot thought—for that is no concern of ours: many men do not believe in reason until their own rationality is involved, and many have laboriously proven that reason is a nonentity with the most lustrous, glimmering twenty-four karat reason of their own—it is enough for us to say that Eliot thought of the poetic endeavor as a process by which disparate elements are combined, which no one would at first think combinable, but which, having been combined, all would intuitively agree fit well together. The non-poet reads the poetry of the master, and feels that love, Spinoza, and the smell of cooking have something to do with each other, but does not know how or why.

In his essay on Dante, Eliot wrote that “genuine poetry can communicate before it is understood.” This is true, but the question is whether we give primacy to the part that initially communicates, or the part that is finally understood. There must be some reliable tool by which we make sense of life. Generally this tool has been reason. But if life is too endowed with mystical properties, too subject to multiple interpretations, or if, for whatever other reasons, life is opaque to the mind, reason loses its capacity to discover truth. We see how serious the problem is, if we consider that a poem which can communicate before it is understood would ordinarily have to be understood by the poet. And if the poet understands it, there is no reason why he cannot give rational articulation to his thoughts. There is no reason for him to evoke his thoughts by combining elements in the crucible of his imagination. If the poet understands what he means, he can articulate what he means, and if he articulates it, the reader can understand what he means too. But if truth is a fuzzy thing, more grounded in relations than in absolute value, or if for some reason the truth of things cannot be expressed in rational terms, what are we to do?

Whatever the question is, there is no doubt about the answer. We are to moor ourselves to the slow-moving rock of history, pressing history as the “historical sense” into the service of our communication with each other and with all time. The intuitive individual with the historical sense can articulate what could otherwise only be imperfectly articulated. Or rather, he can evoke a truth that is inarticulable. Eliot thought truth in poetry is not to be found—or at least not necessarily—in articulated thought. It is to be found in the seeming rightness of the parts in relation to each other and of the whole.

It is no wonder, then, that some have said the fundamental distinction between classicism and modernism is that classical poetry articulates truth, modern poetry evokes it. Classical poetry is born of the idea that the “idea of the thing” is graspable; modern poetry is born of the idea that several layers of refraction must interpose between man and a truth which only has real being when seen through many lenses.

Classical poetry may be metaphorical, allegorical, cascadingly emotional, or anything but what one would associate with cool-headed reason. But it is rational. An image or metaphor can be understood to have a definite meaning. The poem is trying to say something, though it might use figurative language to illustrate its meaning. The illustration, however, does not have a meaning which only fuzzily appears in relation to other images and metaphors. It has a concrete meaning of its own, even if not fully realized until modified by other parts of the poem.

Modern evocative poetry relies on associations and fuzzy images. There is not necessarily any obvious conceptual relation between one sentence and the next. And there is not necessarily any obvious conceptual relation between parts of the poem. We may feel that there is a common theme running through the whole, but we can do no more than feel. If we grasp any one part, we find it has no meaning in itself, and if we grasp any larger part, it slips out though our fingers like sand. This is because the parts are intended to evoke the image or mirage of a whole, but if pressed, they will yield no rational idea.

If we ask to which part of man evocative poetry addresses itself, we conclude that it addresses itself to that part which deals with intuition and feeling. It does not address itself to that part which delights in reason and truth. That we can discover reason in it is no argument. For discovering reason in it is like tracing the ancestry of a dinosaur. One can do it, but it is an intellectually dissatisfying process for the man who delights in order.

The articulate poet articulates the universe. The evocative poet evokes the universe, and reason then examines how it does so. Thus evocative poetry is for the critic, but articulate poetry is for the man. Articulate poetry constructs a vision of order. (One cannot accuse Richard Weaver of coming short on his titles: _Ideas Have Consequences_ and _Visions of Order_ are both remarkably useful.) There is a conceptual link between the parts of an articulate poem, and there is a conceptual link between the lines of an articulate poem. Each part and each line can be understood. The whole is beautifully ordered.

The great classical poem will probably evoke even as it articulates. But it will give precedence to articulated truth, then adapt language to the purpose of the meaning expressed. And it will evoke to the extent that truth properly articulated and understood evokes a response in the reader. The most powerfully evocative poem will be articulate first, because the articulate can evoke more powerfully than the merely evocative ever could.

This confirms our view that the classical poet is a master craftsmen, infinitely more skilled than the modern poet, who might be compared to spume drifting on the tide of life.

[^1]: This is taken from Eliot’s essay, “The Metaphysical Poets.” A more concise phrase with a different emphasis, but to roughly the same effect, appears in “Tradition and the Individual Talent.”
