---
layout: post
title: "Satire Written Some Time Ago, During the Coronavirus"
description: "It was a dreadful year, a terrible year, the sort of year agreeable only to news reporters and politicians..."
---

It was a dreadful year, a terrible year, the sort of year agreeable only to news reporters and politicians. Perhaps it was also agreeable to that disagreeable class of persons which, affecting to philosophize, would “survey mankind from China to Peru,” transcending mankind in the process, and—in short, the outcome of it all being that it would laugh at the foibles, quarrels, and dilemmas of its fellow men, while placing itself in a position of neutrality above them all. It was the year two thousand and twenty. Two thousand and twenty years had not added considerably to the happiness of humankind, nor had twenty, nor had four, nor, for that matter, one. But in the past month, the misery of humankind had increased almost exponentially; though there _was_ some hopeful talk of flattening the curve.

It seems a little army of “buggers” had sprung up somewhere—how it happened, no one knew. Perhaps they had grown like soldiers from dragons’ teeth planted by Cadmus or Jason. In which case, it should be settled beforehand that no stone or jewel thrown in their midst could induce these little buggers to turn on one another. You see, they were not of that kind. They were loyal buggers, and would cling to any object or surface—for as many as seventy-six hours. Once they had formed an affection for a person, they would plague and pester him practically to his death. Though admittedly they were not always so faithful as that, for it was discovered—lo!—that they sometimes forsook one person for another. They were “humanly transmitted,” so to speak.

As I said, though, no one quite knew whence they came. Some said they were bred by the “aggressive impulses” of an alien power, in a sort of reification of spite. Others that the aggressive impulses were actually transactions over the counter of an oriental grocery. Others that they were the revenge of Giuseppe Mazzini, or especially sent to vindicate the “others” in question. Still others that they had been borne down from another planet, as a part of “universal harmony.” But these last were “others,” to put it kindly.

They were now invading. It was not known what they were invading, since some staunchly maintained that they were “the child of the human race, and a visitation upon us for our sins.” According to them, the buggers belonged to all mankind; therefore, one could not say that they were come of any one part. Therefore, (it is odd logic, isn’t it?) they were invading the whole globe, having come forth out of—the whole globe. But perhaps they were like a mushroom, connected by the roots under the ground, popping up here, there, and everywhere without anyone being able to say where the first one popped. But they were invading.

Let us limit ourselves to not speaking of the global debacle. Lies and deceit—two words, the usual. What more can be said? Therefore, let us turn to our particular country, in which the man elected to handle the situation was, as usual, vigorous. His sometime, quondam, erstwhile future opponent was in hiding. He was bashful, and given to “gaffes.” Said he, “If I am to gaffe, I might as well gaffe in relative solitude, remotely, and with no one watching.” He was betting on the invading army to sweep the incumbent out and let him sneak into office, where, suddenly, he would be assertive. But he was in Cheyenne Mountain campaigning retrospectively, and out of the picture.

All right: the only remaining obstacles to our task force commander—or whatever they called him—were these: the Chroniclers, the Public, and the Larger Buggers. The Chroniclers took a break from stirring sediment, and took to stirring the second obstacle. They stirred it topsy-turvily though, and no one was able to elicit a half pound of rational information from them. Having spent the last several years turning their heads around and around and around, they suddenly lost them. They just popped off. They had addled their brains. They had twisted their spines into a fibrous cord, which suddenly broke from the tension, giving off a fireworks display of electric impulses. But what can a man say of Chaos, without sounding as if he had just escaped from Bedlam himself? Therefore, let us have done with the Chroniclers, leaving them to write news, invent news, and boycott news.

The second obstacle, the Public, was composed of such diverse elements that one hardly knows what to say of them. There were the “deniers,” scoffing, but following the regulations nonetheless. There were the civic-minded citizens, who also followed the regulations. There were the yoga instructors and vegan bar frequenters (always a populous lot), who took it upon themselves to lighten the general mood by propagating inspirational quotes and otherwise being “lights to the world” in times of darkness. There were the “hoarders,” gathering unto themselves toothpicks and pasteboard. Thus were they to repel the foe. There was, again, that infernal, eternal class of citizens which enjoys observing and finding fault from the vantage point of neutrality. So much for the Public.

The last obstacle to our hero was composed of the Larger Buggers. They had a majority in the larger branch of Congress. You know of whom I speak. They did not believe in waste. They did not believe in letting a crisis go to waste. They were hard-headed, pragmatic, down-to-earth; they kept their cool. They did not believe in creating excess heat, and to the end of not creating it, they would even have rational moments: not too passionate moments. They conducted themselves about as usual. They spoke many words, and believed some of them. They—together with the Chroniclers and large swaths of the Public—were at any moment at risk of being sent into a tizzy by our hero. He would stir, like a large elephant, and they would go buzzing into swarms like mosquitoes. So much for the Larger Buggers.

Now to the Largest Bugger of All. This was he—the task force super-commander—the Commander in Chief—the Chief—the President. He was Commander in Chief, I mentioned. As such, he took to the defense as to a regular war. It was his aspiration, intention, and habit to win. To that end, he deployed very, very many confusing tactics. He backtracked, side-stepped, and misled, all with a mind to confuse the enemy. He contradicted himself daily—something the good leader will train for all his life. He blundered and blustered, astutely. For he knew that by eternally crying “Wolf,” he would convince some that there was never a wolf, others that there was always a wolf, and still others that _he_ was the wolf.

He set out, then, on his military campaign—he, the “man on horseback,” who only rode golf cart. He deployed troops against his foe in the field, and tried to smoke them out with the flames of trillions. On this matter, I should say a small word. Trillions were spent. Of course he closed the borders and was chided for it. But, as I said, this plague was “born of mankind,” sent upon us as a “visitation for our sins”—those two phrases take care of all parties—and, therefore, closing borders could only be counted as a war crime against humanity (which, by the way, those other criminals had good intentions). But this man was not afraid. This man knew the gospel truth that “a righteous man shall triumph.” Therefore, this man conducted himself as usual.

Everyone conducted themselves as usual. It was all as usual. Tomorrow, the world will go on as usual, and only those will not be remembered for whom the world is not as usual, because it is not.

Oh yes, you ask how it all ended? How the army was repulsed? How order was restored to the empire? Well, it should be apparent that no one, at present, knows anything.
