---
layout: post
title: "The Concept of Man"
description: "The nineteenth century is famous as the era of “economic man”..."
---

The nineteenth century is famous as the era of “economic man.” Man is a purely economic being, whose governing characteristic is rational action according to a calculus of self-interest as described by utilitarianism. “Economic man” has long since gone out of repute. The great experiment that brought him into being has failed. And no one now urges that we keep him around. Indeed, it becomes impossible so to urge. Only those manage who hold public office, are past their youth, and are so out of touch with the “culture war” as to render their opinions irrelevant, their solutions infeasible.

The concept of “economic man” underwent its death throes in the first half of the twentieth century. It died unequally across the West, at different times in different countries and classes. But it died, as all things must die which are not true. We came through a tumultuous period subsequently. “Mass man” played an important role in the twentieth century. National Socialism defined man by race. “Utopian man” strove for the impossible (and evil), and was inevitably reduced to “totalitarian man,” ground beneath the heel of the state. But we are not looking for descriptive definitions, such as “mass man”—rather, definitions acted on by society, or around which society structured itself in some places in some periods during the twentieth century. Man as a mere cipher in the pedestal of the state raising the monumental future (“totalitarian man” perhaps?), and then finally not even raising that, instead becoming a mere element in the great official lie—so we might describe man behind the Iron Curtain.

However it may be, in the twentieth century, “economic man” surely gave way to “psychological man.” Through the tumultuous crucible of the world wars and totalitarianism, with steady pace he came.

Economic man was not viable as a matter of mere theory, let alone practice. Thus psychological man emerged. Both concepts are mechanistic; for they conceive of man as a machine. Both are utilitarian. According to one, the satisfaction of desires is man’s supreme end; according to the other, the satisfaction of what might be called “feelings.” Or rather, according to the concept of psychological man, “expression” becomes sacred. Thus “doing” follows directly from “being,” and being becomes a mere flux, or at best a half-shapen, half-ordered mass of impulses. Man loses his “identity” by seeking it.

Economic man follows from the hubris of the Enlightenment. Psychological man is an attempt to save him from the ravages of time. Since man is more complex than early utilitarians thought, we must factor his complexity into our calculations, while keeping hold of utilitarianism. This concept is more or less sophisticated in various hands. For some, restraint is a key element of psychological happiness. For others “expression” is synonymous with “liberation”—a never-ending carousal replete with constant satisfaction of desires. But regardless, modern man puts psychology into the service of utilitarian happiness. Psychological man, being premised on a lie too, must fail no less surely than economic man.

Indeed, the only stable—and what is more, the only desirable—concept of man is that which takes him as a whole person. Psychology claims to do so, but succeeds only insofar as it points beyond itself. If we accept all man’s “quirks” as being merely psychological quirks, they lose their meaning and become meaningless. Thus the Catholic Church has steadfastly founded its political teachings on the common good with regard to persons. Society is to be ordered around the whole person, and each person is to regard his person and other persons as such. Thus man is a creature (this being important to remember) with a physical, intellectual, moral, spiritual side. He has an economic side, a psychological side, a “rational” (utilitarian) and “expressive” side. But each facet of his nature must be subordinated to his eternal destiny. His various “sides” must be arranged in proper hierarchy, according to truth. When man is viewed and treated as a person, we can regain the concept (or rather, reality) of the “dignity of man,” which has been so much sought after of late.
