---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry: The Poverty of Free Verse [ⅠⅠ]"
description: "There is not much to say that has not been said, as regards the inadequacy of free verse as a vessel conveying poetic beauty..."
---

There is not much to say that has not been said, as regards the inadequacy of free verse as a vessel conveying poetic beauty. When one reads a free verse poem, one feels at once that a disgraceful chicane has been put over on one. One has been told that free verse liberates, that it allows the soul of man to fly free on the wings of poesy, no more hampered by the arbitrary bonds of convention and restraint. One has been told that, after centuries of drudging progress as _homo sapiens_, we can now float in the lofty ecstasies of _homo lyricus_. But one feels, as I said, cheated. One has been told that one will become superhuman, transcending the limits of rationality and sentiment; but instead, one has been robbed of one’s humanity, only to find oneself bartered about by the dehumanizing poets of the modern school. Rather than become more than human, one has become tragically less.

To read the best of formed, or metrical, verse is to aspire toward the divine; to read humbler metrical poetry is to round out one’s humanity at least. But to read Eliot and the modern school is to come near to believing oneself a post-Christian philistine. The modern school plumes itself on having freed us from a tradition of form that has grown stale. It has liberated us from an element grown redundant. But an emancipation from form is a decrease in total order, and therefore an invitation to chaos. Order has been stolen away—order, the rungs on the ladder by which we ascend to the heavens. And we have been left floundering in a fetid swamp, without any prospect of climbing to greater heights. The destruction of form, or order, does not allow the free expansion of our humanity. It extinguishes our humanity, since only by creating systems of order do we become human at all. It is characteristic of the modern world, that it would reduce us to the condition of brutes by robbing us of our capacity to create rational order in the world around us.

It is the Christian opinion that man is a creator, born in the image of God, with the prerogative and duty to create order where chaos was. To give expression to the primal forces that run through the universe is only to channel the immensity of nature, which would be more immense if we looked at it. But the creator, and by extension the poet, is charged with ordering the tiny world that is human endeavor. He may expand our world by pulling in and domesticizing elements, but his reason for being is at least partly the creation of order.

In English poetry, order, or form, is noticeable on several levels at once. Letters are formed out of raw ink, words are formed out of letters, sentences are formed out of words; sentences are strung together in meaningful configuration; words are arranged to produce recurring patterns of syllabic emphasis, which we call metrical feet; metrical feet are arranged to form lines; line ends may be arranged to form rhyming patterns; lines are arranged to form stanzas; stanzas are arranged to form overall poetic structure. These are the technical elements, which facilitate the unquantifiable form expressed in the words themselves. Meaning arises out of the words, which is more or less ordered, and accordingly more or less meaningful, depending on the genius of the poet.

The great poem carries more order than, let us say, the unending stream of consciousness of a drunk. If formed verse is more ordered than free verse, it is a rational first assumption that it is higher poetry. Order is woven into it on several levels at once. Thus in a magnificent cathedral, not only is each decorative part—each painting, sculpture, and stained glass window—beautiful in its own right, but each part stands in harmonious relation to each other, and the whole is arranged into an orderly pattern that pleases the eye and soul.

So it is with poetry. It is not simply that man needs the prop of meter and regular rhyme to please his undeveloped aesthetic sense. Nor is it that tribal man must have a rhythm to beat out—that the aesthetic aid of stamping feet and beating drums, carrying the soul into higher spheres of collective being, necessitate pattern and rhythm. Civilized man cannot now shear himself of his primitive metrical past, and soar lazily into the heights of lyrical ecstasy. Or, in the case of Eliot, it is not as if we have no need of form or convention, but can now sink into a muddy fog of morbidity, sawdust, and oyster shells.

It is an error to think beauty is bound in form, and can be released once the bonds are broken. Form is, indeed, the very vessel of beauty. Beauty revels in form; and man revels in beauty. To liberate poetry from form is to invite back in chaos and ugliness.

In the chaotic waters before they were parted, power was unrestrained and wild. As a consequence, it was diffuse and could not be sent in any direction meaningfully—it was infinite, but its infinity could not be harnessed. Having no form, it had infinite potential. But when it began to take form, it became able to be harnessed and directed. There was no tide before the waters were parted, because the tide implies waters moving in one direction, and this already implies certain binding forms. But the tide is a primitive force. In order to become beautiful, raw power or energy must be regulated and balanced against itself, made to interplay in harmonies and intricacies. It must become subtle, and by becoming subtle it becomes beautiful.

There is nothing beautiful, though there may be something awful, about raw, coursing power. But when that power is ordered, restrained, harmonized—when it is given form—it becomes beautiful. Thus beauty is not something to be liberated from the shackles of formal convention. Form may grow stale and oppressive, but as it is destroyed, to that extent “things fall apart”—all degenerates into chaos. Out of that chaos it is proper to rebuild order.

It is the role of the poet, no less than man, to part the waters of the world around him. The poet’s world is nearly universal, and the particular as particular will hardly do as a subject for him. Like the philosopher, the poet must part the waters of the universe; but like philosophy, poetry has betrayed its purpose, and served to muddy the waters instead. Eliot does not so much part the waters as filter them into a mist. Good poetry does not drum with deadening fingers on the skull—it is nothing like a damp fog. But Eliot’s poetry often too much resembles a damp, polluted fog.

We see from all this that if any defense of free verse can be made, it cannot run thus: “Poetic beauty is bound in arbitrary form. Free verse is revolutionary, since it liberates beauty from form, allowing it to shine forth in its inherent splendor.” Beauty without form does not have aesthetic splendor. Beauty without form is not beautiful.

The vers-librists will instead argue thus: “Free verse does not liberate from form at all. It liberates higher levels of meaning and form from the conventions of past ages that have grown stale.” Eliot’s poetry partakes of as much form as does Alexander Pope’s. It is not confined to the arbitrary convention that is pattern. It has a lyrical formality to it which transcends the stale formalities of the neo-classicists. “Free verse” is bound by the laws of nature—“formed verse” must obey the court ceremonies of man.

According to this apology, free verse is a misnomer. For as Eliot said, “there is no freedom in art.” Surely this is true, and surely there is some truth in the idea that there is no rigid duality between formed and free verse.

But if a person supposes he sees a distinction between one poem and another, as regards the degree of order in each poem, to say simply—“No, my man, it is an illusion; they are equally ordered, neither freer than the other. You might not have delved deep into the subtleties of language and sound, but that is not the fault of the poet. Tune your ear, and see that Pound is equally ordered with Pope, according to the laws of natural form”—to say this is to engage in intellectual shenanigans.

And the astute critic will respond in kind: “Sir, you cannot put that over on me. I see what you are doing. You are conflating levels, degrees, and planes, interacting chemically with each other, into one massy cloud—you are reducing them to one variable, which you call ‘form’ or ‘order.’ Free verse may be ordered in many ways, but as far as the technical levels go, it is less ordered than what I call formed verse. It is freer than verse which partakes of form, and it is verbal deception to say otherwise. ‘Free verse’ might be a misnomer. I propose, then, that we call it ‘freer verse,’ because that is what it is.”

If free verse were liberated further, it would not have syntax, sentences, or words. It would be but a jumbled mass of letters. If it were freed entirely, there would not even be letters. This hardly bears saying. But to conclude that there has not been an overall increase in entropy, and that free verse is not less ordered than formed verse, is to look for vindication in the wrong places. When the overall level of poetic form degenerates, the result is free verse. It might be unfair to compare Eliot’s poetry to the nihilistic scribblings of the twenty-first century “poet,” but no less unfair than to compare Donne to any popular versifier who has gained renown by his scribblings, albeit metrical scribblings, in the daily press. To compare Donne to Eliot, however, is a crime.

Free verse represents a diminution of form on the technical level. But it is not right to continue calling this the technical level. It is not technical form, it is foundational form. Great poetry consists of a dialogue between several layers of form at once. Furthermore, it is hierarchically structured, from bottom to top, so that one cannot simply set fire to the base and expect the pillar to stand.

In the same way that syntax forms the foundation of higher order, so does meter. Thus without syntax, words would be all in a mass, and would have no meaning. Without proper spelling, and punctuation, and separation into words and sentences, letters would simply pile together and the result would hardly be poetic—though I do not doubt it would be published in contemporary journals. In the same way that syntax liberates, meter liberates. It liberates the poet to pursue order on a higher level.

But the vers-librist will chuckle to himself and rejoin: “Free verse utilizes an intuitive, or non-obvious, order as a foundation. Building on this foundation, it constructs palaces of order on a higher level that cannot be discerned by the formalist or pseudo-traditional blockhead.” Thus order is woven through all levels in the free verse poem, only it is not obvious or conventional.

Certainly it is one thing to shed one particularly limiting form of regularity on a low level of order. And it is entirely another thing to dismiss in principle the idea that there must be any regularity and order on a low level at all. It is akin to saying that syntax is no longer necessary—words may repose any place they like. The vers-librists, including Eliot, have said this too. Only they have taken it to greater or lesser extremes. Or one might say that a poem need have no unifying theme—because order on a high level is inhibitive of aesthetic splendor and depth of expression.

Not all form and not all order are worth preserving. Form might be merely conventional, after all. One should not denigrate convention, but any one convention cannot last forever. The language would be poorer without the neo-classicists. But this is not to say that we should continue to use iambic pentameter in rhyming couplets indefinitely. However, it is one thing to move beyond one particular convention, and another to dismiss convention and form altogether.

But this brings us to the fundamental question raised by the vers-librists. Is meter itself a mere convention, and can we now move past it to the heights of liberated lyricism? Or is meter essential to poetry—is metrical poetry almost a tautology? To argue that free verse still partakes of meter is irrelevant. It is akin to defending oneself on the principle that one is not entirely far gone.

It should be obvious that meter is among the essential characteristics of poetry. It is probably one of two functional characteristics—the other being division into lines. This is because without regularity, without meter, poetry is not poetry. I am aware I am repeating myself, but I must emphasize the point. If one wishes to hear harmonies in language which are not impressed into metrical form, if one desires a lyrical experience liberated from conventional constraints, I recommend one take to reading novels. A good novel is not disordered, but it is looser, less regular, than a good poem.

If one desires lyricism without metrical form, one should not come to poetry. It is like asking for paintings without paint—something modern artists are willing to supply. Poetry is a supreme affirmation of human rationality. The great poem holds within it a trust that the universe may be ordered, that man’s mind may be ordered, and that this order is not arbitrary or irrational.

But all this raises the specter of a troubling question. Was it necessary to shed meter and form? In other words, perhaps there was no other avenue left for artistic ingenuity within the formal tradition. Perhaps Monet was necessary as the only avenue from formalism in art. Was Eliot the only avenue from formalism in poetry?

Those who deny the duality of free and formed verse imply that there is no abrupt change from form to freedom. A smooth transition occurred, conveying us into a different form of expression. Perhaps this is so—I do not doubt it. But the concept of a steady slide toward greater and greater freedom is more unnerving than the idea of an abrupt break with tradition. It implies the question, whence from here? Or rather, there: at the moment poetry is such in name only. Art is such in name only. Culture is such in name only. Which inclines one to reexamine what was the nature of the slide.

One asks, is verse to be free from here on out? Or is verse to degenerate into greater and greater freedom? If a historical process led up to the break with form, will that process lead inexorably into further jungles of meaningless expression? In other words, and Eliot would agree with me, culture must be described as in part a historical phenomenon. This means one cannot put one’s finger on any cultural phenomenon, and describe it solely with reference to itself. One must see whence it has come and whence it is going. One must ask, did the tendency toward freedom lead toward the present state of culture? One is almost tempted to ask if every calamity in the modern world is not the product of a misguided notion of freedom. But when one poses the matter in terms of progress, one sees that culture is progressing and has progressed into nihilism and the void. The trend toward freedom is unsustainable; any such trend must at some point be arrested or diverted. Perhaps, in the case of poetry, that point should have been at the break with meter.

There is no viable culture in the direction of freedom. Only a return to order and form will renew our culture. But one wonders what the slide toward freedom represented on a deeper level. Did we simply dismiss metrical verse, or did the slide represent a deeper exhaustion of our culture? Was it, perhaps, a slide into cultural exhaustion? Will the renewal of form be contingent on a change of ideas, or renewal of old ideas, which will give new life to our culture, and open once more the possibility of form?
