---
layout: post
title: "On Individualism and Collectivism"
description: "Modern philosophies that purport to champion the individual actually abandon the individual..."
---

Modern philosophies that purport to champion the individual actually abandon the individual. A “complex, multidimensional analysis”—to string together too many technical words (on the other hand we might as well get them over with)—of certain ideologies and philosophies would show that the individualistic has a way of blurring over into the collectivistic, and vice versa. For instance, communism renders individuals radically alone. Modern “feel good” philosophies that make of everyone a warm teddy bear to be hugged by his neighbor, isolate individuals by trapping them in their own emotions. “Emotionalism” is isolating—Rousseauism sets man adrift on the infinite sea of being, and in so doing, confines him to his own small craft. “Alienation” of the individual has a boomerang effect, so that man reverses course with a vengeance and joins a collective to pursue meaning. Those who pride themselves on their individual rational thought let their guard down, and are very susceptible to “groupthink.”

Modern man is a libertine and an ideological warrior—at once the most individualistic and the least of men. Of course libertines are not truly individuals. They are a dime-a-dozen, for one thing. Only the individual standing alone before God is truly an individual. The individual as a member of a close-knit family, the family being part of an integrated community, is nearest on earth to being an individual. Only integration in genuine community renders the individual indispensable. Anything else renders him anonymous.

But as a question of mere theory, it is interesting to ask if modern philosophy is truly concerned with the individual or the collective.

The drift of modern philosophy is toward individualism “in the context of” emptiness: man is a cipher in a void. Utilitarianism, liberalism, emotionalism, psychologism, relativism, nihilism—these, &c., are the substance of modern thought. True relativism instantly becomes nihilism. Nihilism leads to suicide or ideology—extreme individualism or extreme collectivism—(these two are never far part). Mild relativism of the sort one overhears in coffee shops has a tendency toward collectivism. This is one of the reasons liberalism (which is inherently relativistic insofar as it is ideological) fails. If one does not believe in truth, there is no reason not to take the word of the majority for truth. And if tolerance is the supreme good, perceived intolerance becomes the supreme evil. And wars in the name of “tolerance” against “intolerance” are always more fierce than wars waged by the “intolerant.” It is easier to meld into the mass and rage and foam against bigots than it is to be a bigot and declaim against error and sin. A Christian can understand the views of a heretic, because both believe in truth. But a relativist cannot understand the views of a Christian, and must therefore wage a war of total destruction against him, in the process becoming an ideological warrior, or at least developing an uncritical mind, which, regardless, is what naturally happens when one does not believe in truth. Then truth is identified with the Party.

This piece is mainly concerned with utilitarianism and liberalism.

Utilitarianism looks at macro-consequences, without telling individuals how to live. Its natural tendency is toward statism, because the policies of the state may have the greatest effect for good. Of course moderns do not believe in evil or good. The denial of good and evil leads to collectivism, because it destroys the concept of individual conscience. And it opens the door to the use of unlimited power, which, after all, cannot be used for evil. Evil is only a question of having “intolerant” ideas—of believing in truth.

Utilitarianism leaves individuals adrift in the world. It abandons them. To the extent that it offers them anything at all, it offers them a world of “total work”—and leisure in the form of soul-stifling pleasure. But it does not tell them how to live. And that is the greatest disservice you can do a person. Individuals are then susceptible to ideologies, which do tell them how to live. But at the very least, we may say that utilitarians are concerned with economics—they are concerned with collectives. One sees this at times with blinding clarity, when utilitarians make callous comments about the horrors of the twentieth century. “Oh well, of course, modern civilization is still worth it.” They are concerned always with the majority, which is here the majority as a collective, and they are not even concerned with the majority as a collection of individuals. Numbers—e.g. “standard of living”—take the place of individuals desperate for meaning in their minds.

Liberalism, too, is concerned with collectives. Collectives, minorities specifically, are given the advantage of freedom, while those thus deprived of moral guidance are deprived, too, of truth. Thus groups of individuals demanding greater moral license on the grounds of “identity,” are favored at the expense of the individual, to whom alone true morals apply, and who requires moral guidance. Liberalism always favors the minority—ensuring, perhaps, that it becomes the majority—at the expense of the majority—the majority of _individuals_. Of course the minority may often hold truth in its hands, but this is not an argument for liberalism, it is an argument for truth. This is why liberalism descends into relativism—because it does not make arguments based on truth, but on liberty—allowing the minority to subvert truth. In short, license is given the upper hand in liberal society—at the expense of future generations of individuals who will be bereft of every hard, solid standard to cling to.

We tend to judge even utilitarianism by a utilitarian standard—for the purpose of criticism. The modern secular state may work very well for a time by utilitarian standards, but only by denying truth. A progressive technocracy, or its model in Communist China, may ensure prosperity and even happiness of a kind, but at the expense of the individual. The modern world has not yet collapsed, but its citizens are miserable in the absence of truth. Individuals have been abandoned. For the need of the state is utility; but individuals need truth.

Thus we ought not to be afraid of fighting for _truth_ even in the face of whole oceans of evidence that utility increases, knowing that by so doing, we are fighting for the individual.
