---
layout: post
title: "On Truth in Politics"
description: "In pondering, the other day, what is at stake in the political war, I thought perhaps it is a question, not of freedom, but truth..."
---

In pondering, the other day, what is at stake in the political war, I thought perhaps it is a question, not of freedom, but truth. Certainly one ought to beware rallying under the banner of an abstraction—trite conservative wisdom but true. It is much better to rally under the flag, representing the nation, or even behind a person in office, if it is not the wrong person, especially as embodiment of office. It is better for a party to unite around concrete economic realities than around freedom.

Freedom is understood as meaning a multitude of things. For the left, freedom is defined as “freedom of expression”—a psychologized and consumeristic concept—less consumeristic and verging into ritualistic abasement before the great idol “identity” as society veers left. For the libertarian right, freedom is defined after the fashion of John Stuart Mill. One is free do as one likes so long as one does not interfere with the freedom of others to do the same. This increasingly becomes a very tyrannical sort of freedom. At the moment, conservatives ought to vehemently defend freedom of truth. We shall then find it is not so much freedom we are defending as truth.

America is divided, as everyone knows, though some would have it the division is not fundamental. We are divided by mere superficial political differences. To a certain extent, this is true, unfortunately—insofar as progressivism has already won, having seized every major institution in America, including our schools, captured the minds of the most powerful, educated, well-to-do, geographically well-situated, articulate, outspoken, &c., and made deep inroads on the rest of the country to boot.

And our nation’s capitol is divided three ways between the corrupt establishment with its globalist and often progressive politics, the radical left exerting pressure on the establishment, and whatever momentary opposition embarrasses one or the other or both. This division is reflected in the electorate. Traditional Democrats (what is the word?) “empower” corrupt establishment Democrats. These two groups assert the natural fraternal solidarity of the global progressive elite. Justin Trudeau and Barack Obama shake hands, and generic liberals in cities grow misty-eyed. Mitt Romney, meanwhile, scrounges and cringes for a word of praise. The superficial worldview—effective lack of convictions—of traditional college-educated Democrats, a legacy of classical and traditional liberalism, renders them prostrate and helpless before radicalism. They are ignorant, naive, and their progressive prejudices will forever bind them to the Democrat party.

Radicals on the left are less innocent than moderate Democrats, who at least have the excuse of feeble good will for their shortcomings. They would embrace socialism in an instant. They do embrace political violence. Their friendship is lost upon the utterance of a monosyllable. They were radicalized in college. They are unfortunate casualties of modern philosophy, with an hostility to religion that blossoms cankerously and poisons promiscuously.

Weak Republicans, meanwhile, vote Republican, but are truly progressive. They have better facts than their Democrat counterparts, that is all. They may or may not have voted for President Trump. Truly traditional or Christian conservatives are in the minority.

But these divisions obscure the fundamental division which does divide America. Diversity of thought in fundamentals has always been a myth, and is not even desirable. It is true that people think differently, but we may still identify two distinct Americas in the clash of war. The partisan tussle over issues pales in importance when division is on the level of fundamental philosophy.

Traditional Christians lost the cultural battle long ago. No battle is lost for good, but a religious awakening is likely only to follow on some degree of collapse or unbearable pressure and toxicity. The average Trump supporter may not be conversant with his catechism, but retains some strong traditional convictions nevertheless. Any Christian who would expunge cultural rot from our society, and preserve America and the West unto future generations, must ally himself with the one remaining source of tradition in America—the powerful populism that elected Donald Trump. Strangely enough, some Christians seem ready to join hands in common cause with traditional liberal intellectuals, who are really conservatives’ natural enemies, yet hold Trumpian populism apart in distaste.

Division in America is between progressivism and a more traditional worldview; atheism and at least some heretical semblance of religion bordering on Christianity; utilitarianism verging on hedonism and at least halfway traditional ethics; progressive and conservative politics—a division largely based on knowledge of human nature, and thus concrete connection to reality; social liberalism and social conservatism; globalism and patriotism; the concrete and the abstract, particular and general; superior feelings and hard facts; a liberal sensibility and some familiarity with the conditions of existence—between liberal imperialism and the fabric of being itself.

In short, progressivism is pitted against tradition, atheism against Christianity, globalism against patriotism, and contempt against defiance.

The college-educated, city-dwelling, economically advantaged elite forms a part of the global progressive elite which controls Canada and the countries of Western Europe, looks askance at anything foreign to it, is outraged by Poland and Hungary, and is ready to give up on “America” unless we join the global congregation of uniformly progressive nations. Rural, vulgar America wants nothing to do with it, and is on that point in agreement with traditional Christians.

Political division in America is often presented as being a matter of freedom versus tyranny, or government control. But it is not so much between freedom and impositions on freedom as between competing substantive worldviews. It is less a question of the slippery slope into government control than a more immediate question of truth. For all the rhetoric of freedom, solicitude for freedom in the abstract is a strenuous feat that is practised by out-of-touch elites as a sort of hobby. Conservatives are no more attached to it than anyone else. For instance, they wish to be “free” to express their opinions on social media and college campuses. But mostly they wish it because they believe their opinions are true. They should defend their right to free speech on the grounds that their opinions are at least reasonable.

For a person to say, “I think what you are saying is evil, but will defend to the death your right to say it,” is absurd. I, for one, certainly would not defend to the death anyone’s right to say evil things. It would be more logical to defend to the death their right not to say them. But to defend to the death a person’s right to speak truth is not illogical. It is certainly not illogical to speak truth at the risk of death. It is far more important that a person have the right to live according to truth, and speak truth, than that a lunatic on the fringe of society have the right to live according to a manifest lie, with all participating in it. And the two are not always reconcilable.

Conservatives oppose speech codes: for instance, those which would mandate the use of a person’s “preferred pronouns.” But if they frame their argument in terms of absolute freedom, it is worthless. If truth does not matter, but only the right to say what one thinks, the right to say what one thinks no longer matters. Thus conservatives should, and often do, oppose the mandated use, and even the use, of “preferred pronouns,” on the grounds that they are a lie, not on the grounds of absolute free speech.

We must admit that, while the scourge of progressivism has yet to ravage all parts of America equally, the scourge of psychology has insidiously won across the board. Even many conservatives think in psychological terms, ground their ethics (however nominally “traditional”) in psychology, and are sympathetic to psychological arguments. This is unfortunate.

We must also say that free speech is often defended by members of the conservative elite, who are susceptible to libertarianism. The average conservative defies and overleaps the bounds of expression by wearing a MAGA hat. Or he says nothing. But the true conservative impulse comes into clearer view as we move from the abstract toward the concrete.

Libertarians defend the First Amendment right to free speech. Conservatives defend statues of Robert E. Lee, which have been taken down in the South. Thus the South is made to prostrate itself at the feet of a lie—that Lee was not a Southern hero, but a villain. The slippery slope is not the problem—the lie is the immediate problem. “If they remove your statues, soon they will put you in camps,” true, but also it is bad enough that they are removing statues. Lee is defended by the common people. He is defended as a part of history, as are military bases named after Confederate generals. But if a policy that would strike a general’s name from a military base, on the grounds that it there abides owing to the persistence of racism, and would alter the very fabric of concrete reality itself, is not a policy premised on lies, I do not know what is. To erase history is always to erase truth.

Conservatives instinctively balk at wearing a mask. But is the right not to wear a mask important? It is a question of truth. Conservatives do not wish to structure their lives around a lie—in this case, the lie that they are saving lives by wearing a mask. Wearing a mask is political symbolism. Nor would conservatives have us structure public policy around a lie. Progressive politics fail by a utilitarian standard, but they also fail by the standard of truth.

Symbols are common in everyday dress. But as a revision of history on the grounds of a lie is a mendacious policy, so the revision of social conduct on the grounds of a lie is a mendacious policy, and as a policy, political. Wearing a mask is political symbolism.

Conservatives cleave to the right to bear arms as a particular right, not merely as a right. Though this is seemingly a right in which truth has no part, truth is contained in the Second Amendment. Were leftists correct in their unreasoned solutions to gun violence, conservatives would yield some ground. Were the right to bear arms not an element of a truthful life, and not necessary to defend the right to live truthfully, conservatives would not so vehemently defend it. The philosophy of absolute paternal protection is a lie; the philosophy of some degree of individual and familial and communal self-sufficiency is true. The philosophy of safety is mendacious; that of calculated danger in the interest of living is true. And to revoke an historical right on false grounds is always done in defiance of truth. It is to alter the structure of concrete being on the basis of a lie.

We are not stretching the argument. Conservatives object to lockdowns on the grounds that they are premised on false science and false philosophy. The idea that one ought not to live in order to stay alive is false. So the idea that one ought not to own guns because someone might be shot is false. Otherwise, conservatives would relinquish their guns. Of course conservatives also object to any unreasonable diminution of rights as such.

We have said that America is divided. The question is, what is at stake. Since America is divided, surely something is at stake. We are not fighting a war over nothing. It is not as if civilization will collapse in an instant if Democrats take office—though it may eventually, and we ought to anticipate the future. Of course we shall be able to bear up under adversity if progressives do win political victories. But before the event, it is not a question of bearing up, it is a question of fighting. One thing we certainly stand to lose is the freedom to live according to truth.

It is not our purpose to ask what policies will progressives pursue on the morrow, what are the likely consequences in the distant future, whither are we headed, or how does progressivism interact with radicalism.

Everyone is aware of the immediate consequences of elections. We know what progressives would do to the economy, the judiciary, various rights, and various other matters of policy. But it is interesting to examine one consequence of elections, and yet more so to observe how the electorate responds. There is much at stake, and we are divided over much; but let us look at one thing at stake, and one thing we are divided over.

Americans on either side of the political divide have different ideas of truth. The substantive content of truth varies from side to side. It is interesting to note that the categories of truth, the grades of truth often vary between persons according to philosophy. Thus some find truth in method, others in content. Some find truth in axiomatic sentimental attachments, others in particular propositions, others in general rules fanatically applied, others in general rules prudentially applied. People disagree about what truth as a category is—what kind of content it contains. Some find the only truth in the infinite regression or eternal perfection of truth unto the end of time. This is worth pursuing, but not in this essay.

Americans are divided on the question of the value of truth itself. Most people believe in truth on some level; those who do not end by killing themselves for sheer inability to live in that condition. But progressive Americans do not believe truth matters. They are utilitarians. They think the idea of having one’s conscience violated by phony pronouns is absurd, hateful, immature. Speech codes and political correctness do not perturb them. They do not see political symbolism as a dangerous practice. What is a symbol, after all? Why not take a knee for the sake of agreeableness? What is the harm? They do not mind wearing a mask where it is absurd. One would call it a form of collective neurosis—but it is more like collective indifference. They do not mind wearing a lie on their faces.

Critical race theory is not an abomination, because their thinking is so psychologized that truth has lost its luster for them, and cannot be picked out from convenient lies. And they will repeat words till the end of time if necessary.

That God is taken out of national politics does not perturb utilitarians—who are atheists anyway. Nor do policies predicated on lies bother them. Even abortion—a lie that kills—does not bother them. They retain the capacity to be affected by the utilitarian consequences of any given policy. Thus when they learn that progressive politics fail abysmally wherever they are tried, they are discomforted by it. But most of them never learn, because progressivism is too holy a false god. They are moved by their emotions, so it is necessary to control the impressions they receive.

They are very familiar with lies, but truth is foreign to them. Whereas anyone who believes truth is important will be quite dismayed by any attempt to force him to speak lies or live by lies. He will not like to see his nation pursue lies in the chambers of its government. He will not like to see institutions propagate lies in concert.

“Live not by lies” is an incomprehensible phrase to much of America. Which causes one to roar in the throes of hilarity when told that modernity is the age of reason. It is not: it is the age of feelings expressed, and ends attained by way of means. The highest purpose of reason, the pursuit of truth, requires more than hubris and science.
