---
layout: post
title: "On Love of Country"
description: "They say that love of country is a prejudice..."
---

They say that love of country is a prejudice. As usual, they are wrong. Or, at least, if they say that love of country is a prejudice, they must admit that love of husband, wife, mother, father, sister, brother, children, friends and community, love of one’s property, one’s business, one’s dogs, cats, or guinea pigs, to the extent that they are not motivated by self-interest, are motivated not by reason but by mere unthinking prejudice. Of course one might call it that, but it would be more accurate to call it love. Love is always of the particular, not the general.

No one loves mankind as such. To love mankind is to love an abstraction, and love of abstractions is usually found to be egoism hiding behind idealism. Or it is a lie, or at least a fuzzy sentiment, without any basis in the actual world. Mankind is an idea, and anyone who loves an idea is an idiot. Ideas are a source of conviction, but not of love. Love grasps on to the particular. We cannot love something that we do not know.

The Christian ideal is to love one’s neighbor as oneself—in other words, to love all individual men as one comes across them, but not to philanthropically throw oneself upon the warm flesh and blood of an airy abstraction called mankind.

Love is also a choice. Thus one chooses to marry not only because one loves, one loves because one chooses to. Love is in this sense rational. The Romantics object to reason in love, but they should not, since the only alternative is sentiment, and sentiment is a far less human thing than reason. It is also subjective. The purely subjective cannot be altruistic. Reason in love means an affirmation of the objective goodness of the object loved. This allows love to span the divide between two persons.

Thus love must be rational but also particular. One loves husband or wife based on the objective value of husband or wife, but also his or her particularity. In the same way, one loves one’s country not merely because it is good, but because it is one’s own. There is nothing irrational about that.

Love of country is not a choice in the sense that love of husband or wife is a choice. One did not choose one’s country from some grand line-up of countries presented at birth. But one can choose to hate it, love it, or adopt a selfish attitude of indifference toward it.

Such an attitude would be selfish indeed. For love of country is bound up with gratitude toward country. One owes a great deal to one’s country, which has nurtured one from the cradle, providing all the benefits of civilization.

Only the selfish (i.e. post nineteenth century) view of life allows us to call love of country irrational. According to this, there is no such thing as altruistic love, because man only loves what he desires for himself. But that is not true. Man can use reason to fulfill his own desires, but he can also use it to order himself according to objective reality. Thus he can recognize the objective value of country, and taking that in conjunction with the personal relation it bears to himself, he can love it accordingly.

Granted that country is not as concrete an object as, say, a person, and less valuable. But everything that goes into the constitution of a country—its people, with their shared culture, its culture, customs, mores, laws, history, geography, climate—is concrete and valuable. And as it stands in personal relation to the person who loves it, there is no reason for him not to love it.

One loves something because it is both good and in some way one’s own. Thus love is subjective, because the object loved is one’s own, but also objective, because it is good. But even the subjective element is rational, since one cannot love what is not one’s own; one cannot love something that bears no personal relation to oneself. That would be like loving a dog one knows nothing about, or loving a person one has never met. One does not necessarily love husband or wife because he or she is better than all the other husbands or wives. That may be, but generally speaking, one loves him or her because he or she is one’s own. In the same way, it is perfectly rational to love one’s country, since, after all, one lives in it, knows more about it than any other country, and so forth. One belongs to it, and it belongs to one. One and it stand in personal relation to each other. One shares its history, culture, &c.

It might be said in response that love of country, though perhaps not irrational, should be sacrificed by individuals, being prejudicial to the interests of mankind. Millions have died because men love their country. That is not, strictly speaking, true. We live in a world in which there are nation-states. It is a very good thing that there are nation-states, since without them, there would either be petty tribes or a government sovereign over the entire globe. The former is obviously undesirable; so is the latter. A global government would have too much power concentrated in its hands, and feel too little responsibility for its citizens. And if did not entirely replace nation-states, it would have a hard time replacing them at all. Some nation-states would use globalism as a cover for their own nefarious and self-serving designs. Others would wind up as the dupes of their own good intentions.

As long as there are nation-states in the world, one must recognize this objective reality, and order oneself accordingly. To operate as if nation-states did not exist when they do, is not to be enlightened, it is to be an innocent babe inoculated by college against reality. There being nation-states, there will be conflicts of interest as well as shared interests between them. It being so, only a fool would not side with his own country. This does not mean nations ought not to observe the laws of justice in their relations with each other, but only that a person who would root for a country he cares nothing about over the country he lives in must be a rather peculiar fellow.

Unless we are to sap all joy out of life, by insisting that people love only themselves, we must admit the love of country into life. We must allow men to love the particular, or they will love only themselves, and we shall have nations of selfish individuals on our hands, in which it scarcely matters who loves whom, for society cannot endure in that state. We must permit mutual ownership to exist between citizen and country, lest both perish in the general conflagration, which is bound to occur when self-concerned individuals neglect their duties.

Of course Americans are faced with a singular difficulty in defending their love of country. For, after all, America is among the greatest countries in the history of the world, and thus to defend one’s love of it, one need hardly resort to the fact of mutual ownership. One need only say, “Why shouldn’t I love it? It is, after all, the best.”
