---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry: Morbidity and the Self [Ⅺ]"
description: "If the experience of reading Eliot’s poetry is not a rational experience, one cannot expect that from a wider angle it would appear as clean as the experience, say, of reading John Dryden..."
---

If the experience of reading Eliot’s poetry is not a rational experience, one cannot expect that from a wider angle it would appear as clean as the experience, say, of reading John Dryden.

One does not travel linearly through one of Eliot’s poems. One does not even travel with an eye to front and back, or with an eye to the whole. One does not so much travel as wander through Eliot’s poetry. To wander may be a legitimate aesthetic experience, but it is, as an aesthetic experience, an egoistic one. This, nor anything which follows, should not be taken as abuse of Eliot’s readers. The motives which are abstractly articulable are not always the motives which obtain in real life. But if the poetic experience is articulable, and if we are to believe that Eliot is defensible on more grounds than those of personal whim, we must seek to articulate what experience we derive from him. To say simply that one is fond of Eliot is to defend him on egoistic grounds. But we must defend him on rational grounds; and if we attack him on rational grounds, by showing that the abstract appeal of his poetry is essentially egoistic, we have not shown why people read him.

As I said, Eliot does not seek to bring the reader above the plane of wandering. One wanders through his poems, and by wandering one is to transcend the path. But to transcend the path by wandering is to transcend it by eccentricity and indulgence of the self.

Free verse makes for an excellent Narcissus’ pool. But here I say only that free verse endeavors to liberate. And to liberate is to leave one afloat on the surface of the waters of chaos, or morbidly self-conscious in the mists of half-chaos. Only by order does man transcend and forget himself, because only order is transcendental.

But a free verse poem that also evokes instead of articulating so liberates the reader as to leave him without any scrap of order to catch at. The reader cannot find his way through a poem that fundamentally does not make sense, and he cannot even console himself with the vestiges of rationality that we call metrical feet; so he is left with nothing to do but wander.

Reading Eliot, one has been wandering though one’s own ego—not for the purpose of understanding it, but simply for the experience of wandering through it. One has been wandering through a universe, which one then discovers to be one’s own head. Because Eliot’s poetry does not even offer a chance of redemption or transcendence, one is reduced at the end to a morbid consciousness of self, and it is a miserable self at that. Even the Romantics offer some transcendence through beauty, though it is in the end spurious; whereas Eliot offers only wallowing and wandering. He breaks down the last barrier to degradation and sinking, which is convention and form. Perhaps there is a light buried somewhere in his poems, but it is a light that cannot rise and become a star. Eliot breaks down the last barrier to the world of beasts and demons. If one believes we are reduced to the state of beasts and demons in the post-Christian world, and there is no hope of transcendence, or that we must transcend our beastly and demonic state through the tools available to beasts and demons, that is one thing. But if one believes man is still capable of humanity and, thence, divinity, that is another.

If we believe man becomes his fullest by constructing barriers, not by tearing them down, we shall not be tempted by free verse. Free verse is a barrier to transcendence. As the barriers that constitute a functional hierarchy, if they are torn down, leave one uniform and stagnant plane; so the barriers of form are the steps on the stairway to transcendence, which if torn down, leave only a marsh equally low in all spots. One is fully aware of one’s own being, and to that extent Eliot has succeeded, but one is not aware of any avenue to a higher being.

Yeats writes, “the ceremony of innocence is drowned.” All ceremony is drowned in Eliot, and all innocence with it. But this is not a consequence only of his subject, it is a necessary consequence of the destruction of form. Innocence, like most that is good in life, comes of form. One can believe that form is arbitrary and constructed by man, or one can believe it is divinely ordained, but in either case, to destroy it is suicidal. It may embitter the reader, and it will certainly leave him an egoist.

To reduce the world to a mist of energy is always egoistic. This is because one is, like it or not, an ordered being; and if the surrounding world is chaotic, one becomes the center of the universe. At that point, in one sense, oneself is all that exists. This might lead one to become a nihilist or a megalomaniac, but in either case one is an egoist.

Eliot writes, “Poetry is not a turning loose of emotion, but an escape from emotion; it is not the expression of personality, but an escape from personality. But, of course, only those who have personality and emotions know what it means to want to escape from these things.”

The idea of dying to self is not foreign to Eliot. But by taking the wrong tack to that end, he winds up writing poetry which renders the reader morbidly conscious of himself. We die to ourselves through form; we become egoists only if we destroy form, and let chaos in.

Again, I must emphasize that most of Eliot’s readers are not egoists.[^1] Probably they enjoy his poetry because, living in an ordered universe, they must sometimes step out of it to see what an ugly and disordered one would be like. But this is a tentative suggestion, which can be of value only to those to whom it might apply. I do not wish to join the ranks of those who would psychoanalyze their opponents, thus avoiding the necessity of addressing their ideas. The practice is especially aggravating where one is not even a contestant, but a neutral third party, analyzing the psychology at play in a conflict from a nearby mountain peak. How one can understand the fray without taking part in the fray is inexplicable to me. And how one can understand without even considering that the contestants might be in earnest, that they might actually believe what they profess to believe, and that their ideas should be taken at face value, is equally inexplicable.

[^1]: At least, no more than the rest of us.
