---
layout: post
title: "The Politics of Truth"
description: "There is the idea, promulgated by the moderates, Men of Science ensconced in universities often, and gentle souls presumably, that the solution to extremism is moderation in the form of competing ideologies that hold each other in tension, and prevent the system from spiraling out of control..."
---

There is the idea, promulgated by the moderates, Men of Science ensconced in universities often, and gentle souls presumably, that the solution to extremism is moderation in the form of competing ideologies that hold each other in tension, and prevent the system from spiraling out of control. We see abstract systems constructed, in which liberalism is given this function, conservatism that function, and libertarianism another function, and while visions of glory remain unrealized, the social order works sufficiently well.

Of course visions of earthly glory are the puerile pipe dreams of idiots. The _true_ political philosophy would discount them out of hand. But the idea that a number of moderate ideologies can interlock in such a way as to keep each other in check, ensuring that society remains reasonably just, free, and ordered, is worse than a pipe dream, it is an academic delusion.

Of course in any society not dominated by a spirit of official censoriousness such as would squelch the imagination of the most independent-minded dreamer, there will be disagreement, and as long as the limits of disagreement are properly defined, it will likely prove fruitful. But disagreement presupposes a fundamental agreement—that truth is worth pursuing.

But the moderates replace truth with a system. According to them, certain ideologies, defined for us or flourishing organically, need not have as their end truth. The end is unity in plurality—many moderate ideologies, competition between them, equanimity thereby.

First of all, it is obvious that such a system could hardly be adopted. It is an abstract system spun out of ethereal stuff. It is a plaything of intellectuals. It stands in no relation to the actual battle taking place on the front lines of the culture war. It is a way of being useless while pretending to be useful.

But let us pretend it were possible to adopt it. The question is, how would one go about this? Let us say the whole country accepted an abstract system of competing ideologies, balanced against each other, with a role defined for liberalism, conservatism, &c. This would not help anyone decide where they fit into the system. It is all well and good to know why there are liberals and why there are conservatives, but whether to be a liberal or a conservative is the question. The fact is, no one wants to be a component in an abstract system. No one _knows how_ to be a component in such a system. One can appreciate the merit of it, but usually people’s political principles stem from conviction. One is a liberal because one believes liberalism is true—or one is a conservative, &c. The effects of an abstract system on society are negligible. To effect social change, one must change people’s minds with regard to truth.

On the other hand, perhaps we shall be persuaded by the system to moderate our ideology, or to see the merit of others. With it we can appreciate that our political opponents are not bad people, and may even have some points. First of all, it bears suggestion that the Christian injunction to “Hate the sin, love the sinner” is far more satisfying than the moderate injunction to attribute apparent sin to a conjunction of the sinner’s ignorance and the observer’s blind partiality. Of course the Christian injunction has nothing to do with moderation; nor is it filtered through a bland and sterile abstract system.

At any rate, there is a division in American society—a fundamental cultural division. This being the case, both sides cannot be right. One side at least, perhaps both, must be hopelessly wrong, and its partisans hopelessly ignorant. The only reason anyone is proposing the abstract system is that the actual system has broken down. But once the system has broken down, the abstract system is useless. One side at least has fallen into such all-comprehending error that there can be no appreciation of its good points. It has none. And it will seem this way to both sides. Either I am right, or you are, or neither of us is. That we both have some of the truth is impossible.

It is worth repeating that, when there is fundamental division in a culture, one has no choice but to choose one of the two sides, or a third. To choose a synthesis of all sides is unreasonable, because (to put it in the most flattering light) it is to ask others to decide to be reasonable. But there has never yet been a case in human history where a serious conflict of ideas has been settled by everyone mutually deciding, “Let’s all us just be reasonable.” The truth is, one must identify who is the cause of the problem. Is it likely they will be reasonable? They will not.

When reason break down, affairs come to the _ultima ratio_, which is force. And one must admit that there is something romantic about fighting a just and holy war. There is nothing romantic about impotently screeching from the sidelines, “Look, I have it all figured out: if one side gives up this, and the other side gives up that…we can come to some sort of agreement...”

But the moderates might make themselves useful by looking back in time and examining where we went wrong. Doing so, they will we see that their abstract systems are wrong even in the abstract. This is because they replace the pursuit of truth as the determining factor in political conviction with ideology. Ideology is blind and unquestioning with regard to truth—indeed, establishes itself as a replacement for truth, a blueprint that the world must conform to, rather than a map that must conform to the world. The moment people abandon truth embodied in tradition for ideology, they have lost the corrective mechanism that prevented various ideologies from spiraling into extremism, and have opened the door to extremism. Thus moderate ideologies are the problem, not the solution.

There is one idea which might be used in defense of the abstract method: that there are certain fundamental, timeless patterns of thought, or temperaments, which operate regardless of reason, and determine our politics. If this be the case, let them operate. Why bother ourselves with them? The fact is, different ideas, different patterns of thought, different tempers of mind obtain in different times. Therefore all one can do is seek truth, then take up the cause of truth, advancing it through persuasion, legal means, and if one’s hand is forced force. Attempt to work it into the institutions that form society as well as the minds and hearts of men. But argue from truth, not in favor of an abstract system that does no one any good.

One suspects that abstract systems serve as an avenue for scientists to enter into politics. One dislikes being too harsh with scientists who insinuate their way into places they do not belong, but then again when something is none of their business, they need to learn their place. Their systems are not useful. They are a mechanism for imposing their thought on the world, deriving thereby a sense of personal scientific control over the affairs of men. They allow scientists to play the law-giver from the sidelines where they are irrelevant. But in the world of men, we are not interested in their pretensions or systems of faulty, misapplied science. We are interested in truth.
