---
layout: post
title: "The Pursuit of God"
description: "It seems absurd to think that one could prove or disprove the existence of God by abstract argument..."
---

It seems absurd to think that one could prove or disprove the existence of God by abstract argument. The question of God’s existence being different in nature from any other question—indeed, being the question on which all others hinge—one should not treat it as one would treat other questions. One is not obliged to have an opinion about business cycles, the moving sofa problem, or the relative therapeutic value of yoga and trout fishing. But one is obliged to have an opinion about the existence of God. Or rather, one is obliged to seek an answer to the question of God’s existence with all earnestness. And with honesty—in other words, one must ask what would be the nature of God if He does exist, then look for _that_ God.

For instance, one cannot say, “Modern science has not found God; therefore, God does not exist.” If God does exist, He might well hide His face from anyone so presumptuous as to test His existence using the scientific method. Nor can one say, “If God exists, let Him come to me.” If God does exist, it is reasonable to assume He would require us to come to Him. Thus in asking the question, “Does God exist” (which one must ask), one must ask as if one knew that God _does_ exist, and were desperately seeking Him.

One must ask how, if God does exist, He would discover Himself to us. Well, one answer is history. God would enter the historical record. On examination, we see that this might have happened in the Incarnation (as well as in the history of the Jews, and on any occasion a miracle is  reported). All the usual objections here obtain—namely, that any miracle is so improbable as not to be trusted by report, that even our own senses might be fooled, and that miracles have ceased in the modern world.

In other words, we are skeptical with regard to any experience of the supernatural. Obviously this skepticism is justified. Anything falling out of the usual order of things is subject to doubt. But on the other hand, we gain something valuable from the historical report of the Incarnated God. We have no use here for a rigorous discussion of miracles as such; rather, our purpose in using history is to gain an understanding of such a God as would exist, if He does exist. We know from history that if there is a God, it can only in reason be the Christian God. We know this also from our own examination of the various religions of the world. It is possible, for instance, to dismiss any form of dualism. It has been pointed out that any attempt to divide sovereignty over the world between two powers, one good and one evil, suffers from two flaws, one metaphysical, one moral. The metaphysical is this: if there are two powers over the world, they must themselves exist within a previously existing framework, which is prior to and above them; this framework would be God. The moral objection is this: if there is a good power and an evil power, and no third and higher power, what standard have we to determine which power is good and which evil?

Thus we reject dualism using pure logic. Every other religion of the world can be rejected using some combination of abstract reason and historical insight. Only the Christian religion requires closer examination. Thus both history and reason inform us that if there is a true religion, it is the Christian religion. I set that down as a presupposition here, letting the reader confirm it for himself if he likes, or if he disagrees, letting him finish this essay with that qualification in mind. Alright: for our purposes, if God exists, He is the Christian God.

It follows from what I said earlier that we must seek this God according to the nature of this God. Thus everything Christianity says about Him must be heeded: that he is a three-personal God, and that the person of the Son is the Mediator between us and the Father. If we are told that the cares and pleasures of the world obstruct our way to Him, that must be heeded. If we are told, &c., &c. It is necessary to fully engage with the Christian religion.

But we must expect that, if we find God, it will be through a purely personal pursuit of Him. We cannot, to use a modern term, “outsource” our pursuit. No abstract argument can discover Him, no scientific test either, and, most emphatically, the opinion of the professional atheists cannot—what, then, remains? Why, the hard way, of course! One must make an honest effort to seek Him oneself. One must pursue meaning in life, having set one’s life in order. One must discipline mind, soul, and body for the pursuit of God. Through the life of prayer, through some flirtation with the Church (of course, one cannot be expected to enter the Church and take the sacraments without some degree of preexisting faith), one can seek Him on His own terms. One must read Scripture, obviously, and attempt to understand the Christian faith generally. One must understand that true faith comes of a personal encounter with Christ. Only then can one have an opinion on the matter. And since, as I said earlier, one must have (or seek) an opinion on the matter, one might as well begin immediately. After all, the search should not be treated as a burden: it is the most important thing in life, and the existence of the supernatural the most important thing to know. Everything we do depends upon it.

In short, one must give Christianity a chance. There is no question of dismissing it; of abstaining from having an opinion on religious matters. There is no question of testing it lazily, or according to any terms but those set by itself. Therefore, one must do the work. In the past, our disinclination to contemplate God was seen as one manifestation of original sin.
