---
layout: post
title: "A Defense of Poetry Against T.S. Eliot and the Modern School: Introduction"
description: "I have often wondered at the reputation of T.S. Eliot..."
---

I have often wondered at the reputation of T.S. Eliot. “As a thoroughgoing and unapologetic traditionalist, I read his poetry, and find it nothing but obscure prose divided vertically, and shrouded with abstract literary theory, which cannot veil the fact that it is, fundamentally, ugly.” That is the sort of stuff with which I filled the first draft of this book. But I have endeavored to remove all such polemical abuse and adopt a reasonable tone. I do not deny the genius of Mr. Eliot, but I do deny the place accorded to his poetry in the pantheon of the greats. I deny that Mr. Eliot can be linked to the great tradition of Western poetry, except to the extent that there is continuity between health and decay. Specifically, for I am not interested in attempting to wrest his laurels from him, it is my ambition to spark among fellow conservatives a fire of controversy which needs to burn. If it is decided that Mr. Eliot is, contrary to the opinions of innumerable men worthy of the greatest respect, a shoal to be avoided rather than a rock to steer our course by; or if, instead, it is confirmed unto ages that he is an immovable hero of the cultural front, and that the author of this discourse is a blockhead, to be pitied and henceforth disregarded, I shall in either case have achieved my purpose. For the question of Mr. Eliot’s status should not be taken lightly. On it depends the future of Western poetry, and probably Western culture.

Probably our conscious determinations on the question of Mr. Eliot will be of little consequence for the future of poetry and culture. Probably, if and when our culture recovers from its current state of exhaustion, it will do so by salvaging what is good from the modern school of art, while rejecting the modern spirit and forms.[^1] And probably this will occur regardless of any committees convened to dissect the history of poesy, or controversies that shake the pages of conservative journals. But a spark might inflame this process sooner rather than later, or lend encouragement to those who are already laboring in the shadows. And it might cause a new openness in the conservative community to budding poets who might break the stale and tired trends of the present.

It would come as no surprise if Mr. Eliot achieved renown among the university professors and College Graduates of the world. One does not expect good taste from persons who have undergone years of intensive training, with the single purpose of battering good taste and common sense out of them, and battering in the theory and sensibility appropriate to a modern mind. However, I am not aware that poetry is read in college these days, and if it is, and if Mr. Eliot is mentioned at all, it is probably principally to denounce him as a fascist. But if we assume that Mr. Eliot is read, I would have nothing to say about that. One does not notify a pig wallowing in mud that it has a slight maculation just below and to the left of its second chin. And one does not look too narrowly at the literary tastes of a philistine who doubtless does not believe in culture. If Mr. Eliot is read in the universities, one should first be glad that anything is read, and then be relieved that anything as good as Mr. Eliot is read.

It is the world of traditionalists, conservatives, Christians, and dissenters from modern orthodoxy generally with which my bone is to be picked. Commendable as this coalition generally is, I think it errs in according the highest honors to the poetry of T.S. Eliot. I generally agree with its diagnosis of modern poetry—that it is irredeemably bad. But how Mr. Eliot escapes this criticism, I must confess escapes me. I have read several critiques of modern poetry, which build gradually into a steady roar, then break like a thunderhead over the versified and perverse prose which constitutes the world of modern poetry. My heart beats along to the cadence of the author, as he lashes the waves and whips the flood, onward, and onward, against the hubristic and erroneous thinking of the modern poet. Then, having lost my soul to the argument, I come to the conclusion of the essay, and find the author advocating that we return (“O O O O”) to the poetry of the mighty conservator: Thomas Stearns Eliot.

This is, I must admit, somewhat of an anticlimax. For the longest time the contrast between my high opinion of the traditionalists and my vehement dissent concerning Mr. Eliot prevented me from mentioning my objections to his poetry. I felt that, where the whole conservative cultural establishment was unanimous in its opinion of Mr. Eliot’s greatness, surely I, who differed, must be in error. The schoolteacher tells—or told—the child, “If you do not like Shakespeare, the problem is not with Shakespeare.” And in my case, “If your feelings for T.S. Eliot are a confusion of distaste and tepid uninterest, you will discover that the problem is your own.” I thought perhaps I might be exculpated by hunting up Dr. Johnson on taste, and pointing out that there is a subjective and objective element to it. Other times I thought my dislike for Mr. Eliot’s poetry must constitute a personal blindspot or character flaw. I considered doing penance by reading _The Waste Land_ or bludgeoning myself with abstract theories and literary criticism. The former did not do much good for my opinion of Mr. Eliot, and as I have always believed that most criticism is a form of intellectual fraud, I could not console myself, or change my mind, by reading more of it. My only resort was to remain silent most of the time, and shrug ambiguously when asked my opinion of Eliot’s poetry. (Let us stop with this whole “Mr. Eliot” business; it is tiring, and I cannot continue it.)

But then I read a free verse satire of Eliot’s “Prufrock,” by G.K. Chesterton. Chesterton, of course, never wrote free verse in his life but this once. I could convince myself that where the conservative cultural establishment and I differed, I was wrong; but when it came to a divide between Eliot and Chesterton, I could not believe that Eliot was right. I had no doubts with whom my allegiance lay. On this occasion I was emboldened, and thenceforth concealed my opinion of Eliot only out of tact. But since I have often thought that even the “traditional” poets of the modern world are aiming at the wrong thing—and since free verse does not become poetry simply by being metered or rhymed—I soon decided to write this book.

I offer no literary sounding or well-groomed theory proving that Eliot erred in formulating his “objective correlative”—that it should instead have been a “subjunctive analogue” or any such deliberate nonsense phrase—and I do not critique the subtle flaw that has plagued criticism for two hundred years—its roots ultimately deriving in the Middle Ages—and has been magnified in the current age, the result being an edifice built on sand, or a superstructure floating in midair. I do not peddle the concepts of literary theory, proposing that they be reconfigured, or construed so, or so; and I do not combine or separate or forge new paths in the ancient art of criticism. I am not interested in applying the principles of the French, German, English, American, or Ugandan school to _The Waste Land_. I believe criticism, like psychology, is singular in that it has probably done more harm than good over the years. Therefore, I intend to show, using the principles of sound aesthetic sense, that we ought to seek elsewhere from Eliot for conservative poets.

One discovers a difficulty whenever one sets out to defend common sense in the face of subtle theory and evocative language. One does not know what to say. One can only assert and reassert that common sense is far more useful than abstractions and perfectly formed smoke rings mouthed into the air. But what is there to say for the rest of the book? I have solved this problem to the best of my abilities, and it only remains to let the reader be judge.

It is the core assumption underlying these pages, that the reasonably cultured person should be able, upon a reasonably nontrivial perusal of any literary production, to decide that it falls in the lump category of good, bad, or indifferent literature. One who has read and absorbed a critical percentage of the Western canon, and read and absorbed the great poetry of the ages; and who is, accordingly, able to read with an open mind any poem, should not have to be educated into the eccentricities of a certain school of aesthetic taste in order to appreciate its contributions to culture. If weeks of study are required to even glean the first milk of aesthetic splendor from Eliot’s poetry, it is my belief that one has not become more cultured, one has become wise in one’s own conceits, and cannot expect others to share one’s taste.

An appreciation of the theory underlying Eliot’s poetry, a knowledge of the many references he makes, and an exhaustive reading of _The Waste Land_ and “Prufrock” might loosen the chains of ignorance, and allow one to appreciate Eliot’s poetry further—but only after one has already read it and been struck by its beauty of expression and sentiment. One knows it is good, upon a first reading of Edward Lear’s “The Owl and the Pussy-Cat.” One cannot say this of “Little Gidding.”

Now it only remains to begin the book. But before I begin, let it be said that I bear no personal animosity toward Thomas Stearns Eliot. Nor does my criticism of Eliot extend past his poetry. At times it will be necessary to critique his criticism as well. But I read _Culture and Christianity_, and quite liked it.

[^1]: It is, at least, orthodox to say this. It may well be the case that culture will flourish once more only when it has rejected modernism entirely. The history of culture has often been a succession of stages, one stage rebelling from the preceding one, lasting for a time, then yielding to another. But in our case, I think the rebellion will have to be more drastic, since modernism itself was a rebellion of unprecedented magnitude—a rebellion of kind not degree.

[8/13/20: As they are generally deficient in merit, I have removed every chapter of _A Defense of Poetry_ from this website, with the exception of the introduction. I wavered back and forth for some time, in deciding whether or not to remove the introduction as well. In favor of doing so, was the circumstance that it might seem—and worse, be—in poor taste to criticize such honorable men as those belonging to the conservative cultural establishment without providing arguments to support one's case. For two reasons, however, I have decided not to remove it: first, that those who have, like myself, been discouraged by the monolithic cultural clout of Eliot the Giant may take refuge for a moment in the knowledge that, if they err, they are not alone; and secondly, that in the end the question of Eliot's status is a question of taste, which can only be decided by reading and judging. Of course there are rules of criticism, but these are grounded in the basic instinct of good taste developed by education. This introduction, then, alone spared the unforgiving rod of criticism, may be taken as an opinion, the conclusion of one school of taste, the obvious fruit of common sense, or anything the reader likes. That which refers to the effect this book might have on the world (always purely hypothetical) or this book's further development, may be either disregarded or looked on as a curiosity.]
