---
layout: post
title: "On the Necessity of Considering Christianity"
description: "It occurs to me that modern critics of Christianity take a peek at the religion while holding it at arm’s length, than hastily cast it away with a sneer and a gibe..."
---

It occurs to me that modern critics of Christianity take a peek at the religion while holding it at arm’s length, than hastily cast it away with a sneer and a gibe. Or they dabble their toes in the vast ocean, then withdraw their foot and declare it is nothing but shoals.

Still more do those who have not given a serious thought to the religion examine it in the light of a shallow philosophy, in which it looks pale. Or they analyze it on terms they themselves have set, on which terms naturally it disintegrates.

Christianity is often seen as being implausible to the extent that it is absurd. As Christian writers have suggested time and again, a religion, to have the barest chance of being true, must be absurd. It must be as intricate, Byzantine even, as reality itself. Yet it must also have a quality of simplicity. There is nothing more laughable than utilitarianism, except eternal utilitarianism. The combined ideas that God exists, man is immortal, and utilitarianism is true are an ill-wed trio. If God exists and man is immortal, utilitarianism is hopelessly simplistic and false. And the “religion of all good men” is nearly as simplistic, and nearly as false.

Christianity also seems a refuge of simpletons. It is rejected on the grounds that a baby could believe it. In my experience, true religion grows more often than it dies with age in this irreligious era. Certainly the simplicity lies not in the believer but in his critic. Christianity quite simply cannot be rejected, unless it be rejected _in toto_, with its every doctrine intact, and its doctrines interacting as they do. Even then it cannot be rejected, unless a personal and earnest effort be made to seek its Object.

Christianity is false as a popular religion. (Of course it accounts for this, teaching that salvation does not require erudite and sophisticated knowledge of Christian doctrine, but rather the common person, with obedience to Christ, and the faith of a child, according to his capacity, may be saved.) Any one of its doctrines, taken in half-form, is false. Thus Chesterton is an important thinker, because he shows how Christianity always combines two opposite principles in a system of order which allows both to run wild. Chesterton draws fine distinctions. The Christian religion must be true in every part, every part relating to the whole truly. To disprove Christianity by seizing one part and criticizing it, is to distort that part by isolation.

Many Christian, specifically Catholic, doctrines, are quite absurd. Indeed, the mystery at the heart of Christianity is absurd. But the question is, is it true? Are Rome’s wildest doctrines true? Is the doctrine of transubstantiation true? It cannot be proven false in isolation. “Catholics believe bread turns into Christ,” is a childish representation. Christ, indeed, spoke of the faith of children. But that transubstantiation is necessary and logical is obscured in bare statement. Transubstantiation as a doctrine cannot be taken “at its (apparent) essence,” and proven false. “What, basically, do Catholics (or Christians) believe?” The whole point is that it is not basic, it is a profound mystery, as true religion should be.

The Christian (Trinitarian) God is a profound mystery, whose ways are inscrutable, although not entirely. Christianity, if it is wrong, is nevertheless profound. To attempt to grasp and dismiss it on a lower level than that of profundity is to commit a gross error.

Science being the common possession of all, some would explain away elements of religion using it. “Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I,” becomes the psychology of group prayer, the collective mind. Or a half-truth is asserted in place of a Christian whole truth portrayed as the opposite half-truth. Many have noticed that Christianity is far more reasonable than the various systems dashed against it. Thus secular sneers against faith lack subtlety, whereas Christianity holds the reigns of faith and reason both. “But faith is irrational!” That, however, cannot be asserted without deep study. Then it will be found that Christianity has an answer to every casual assertion made against it. Not because it proves its criticism is no criticism, but because it proves it baseless.

And of course it is very dangerous to assert that Christianity may be partly true, but it remains for man to discover ever more fully the tenets of the true religion. Christianity must be accepted or rejected _in toto_ because the very premise of a personal God precludes the possibility that He would lie to us, one, Christianity is internally consistent, two, and it has the quality of a monstrous truth or a monstrous lie, three, and any attempt to alter it subsides into madness or debility.

Of course one may choose not to engage with Christianity at all, but that would be a mistake. Every individual in the world ought to make a serious effort to engage with Christianity, to understand it. One has no other choice. For Christianity forms the basis of Western Civilization, and has been believed by the best and most intelligent men for nearly two thousand years. It is the only explanation for the world that avoids nihilism without evident illusion, and really the only one that makes sense.
