---
layout: post
title: "Education in the Modern World"
description: "We live in a time in which it is necessary, more than ever, to educate against the current and across the grain. No more is it possible to immerse the student in the great continuous current of Western civilization, then turn him loose into the world to be a good citizen and a well-turned individual..."
---

We live in a time in which it is necessary, more than ever, to educate against the current and across the grain. No more is it possible to immerse the student in the great continuous current of Western civilization, then turn him loose into the world to be a good citizen and a well-turned individual. No more—far from it—is it possible to conceive of education as a form of introduction into the common culture and heritage that, leaving school, the student will become a part of.

Education is, or should be, no longer an introduction into other cultures, no longer an extended flight from which we can return, and roost once again in our own time and place with a broadened mind. It is, in short, no longer enough to prepare him for the flow, throw the student into the flow, then watch him be borne along. The flow is flowing in the wrong direction; and now, more than ever, it is necessary to _consciously_ equip the student to swim upstream. Probably the brunt of the effort will be borne by the student himself, who must engage in the lonely task of systematically forming his own thought and character, with little reference to prevailing social conditions. He must be ruthless in pursuit of all that is valuable, but he must take nothing in the world on faith.

The effort should not be piecemeal; for then it would have no resistance before the broader culture. The student must form an articulate and articulable worldview, which is not only broader than the popular worldview, but capable, when necessary, of prevailing over it. He must be wary of the culture, and wary as well of various countercultures. A counterculture—even a Christian or conservative counterculture—is informed by the culture around it. But anything that has touched the culture must be scrutinized critically by the student.

An alternative culture is truly independent of the culture. But it is probably no solution either. It is impotent to effect change in the world; it cannot draw on the greater spiritual resources of a unified culture; and it is difficult to establish. There may come a time when it is the only solution to a secularized world. But for the present, any alternative culture is confronted with the threat of being utterly insipid. “We are the alternative culture. That mere fact absolves us from the obligation of creating anything actually vital. It is enough that we are Christians, conservatives, who believe in culture, common sense, read the great books on occasion, talk about them, talk about talking about them, and so forth.” So long as civilization is not literally crumbling around us, it will be almost impossible to have any amount of cohesion or commitment to a truly vital alternative culture.

Those who might be broadly designated as “traditionalists,” are so scattered about society, that there is no prospect of them gathering together and having the physical proximity necessary to support an alternative culture. They are part of the broader culture, and must, therefore, confront the reality of it.

It has been established that the student cannot simply ignore the culture: for then he would become a part of it unwittingly; also that he cannot trust it: for then he would become a part of it without a struggle. He can hardly fight it with instinctive reaction, or with the tools of propaganda and ideological warfare, for that would be to fight it without an alternative. The student must, then, confront the culture. In confronting it, he will become a part of it, but in the role of dissident and, potentially, reformer. These terms are forced upon us by circumstance. We are dissidents, because if we do not dissent, we shall unwittingly affirm. We are reformers, because the act of dissenting is the character that reformation takes.

The student must dissent from the culture by holding it up to a critical standard, analyzing every part of it, painstakingly rejecting it, and just as painstakingly assembling an alternative. I have not described this process chronologically. The act of rejecting the popular culture must proceed glove in glove and cheek by jowl with the act of assembling an alternative. The student cannot reject without positive affirmation, or affirm without deliberate rejection. As the student scrutinizes the culture around him, he will simultaneously immerse himself in the Christian and genteel cultures of the past, for instance. The dross will be purged, the gold purified, in the crucible of his active mind.

Education must be a conscious process; for the only people who are truly traditionalists in the modern world are those who have fought for it. Christians are sometimes at a disadvantage in this respect. They do not see the necessity of confronting the culture article by article. They have their alternative, ready made, which is all they need.

But if they do not understand their alternative, it becomes nothing more than an ornamental polish that refines the manners and slightly elevates the sentiments, and perhaps even draws forth some contrarian professions, but, in the end, lacquers a person as modern as any other. If they do not understand their alternative, and if they do not understand what it is an alternative to, they will have no knowledge of what each excludes. And then they will not have an alternative at all.

It does not become me here to catalogue the various aspects of modern culture that must be subjected to scrutiny. Suffice it to say that the ideals of the Enlightenment must be especially criticized. Any ideal having to do with freedom, tolerance, and to a lesser extent equality must be thoroughly gone over. The student will find them creeping into his thought where he supposed he had eradicated them (in their reprehensible form) entirely. There are ideas which pervade the mind of most modern people, regardless of political affiliation or, sadly, religion.

The student must be conscious of the forces of good and evil in the world, and accustomed to think in ethical terms. Ethics must be understood to imply personal responsibility. The student (it seems unnecessary to say this for the Christian student, but it is not) must be accustomed to continually ask the big questions.

The student must understand the real distinctions between great and modern art. These distinctions exist not only in principle but in fact. There is a form of conservatism which consists of holding always to the innovations of the day before, against the innovations of the day, then later looking back, and seeing the wisdom in every change. But conservatives must not be afraid not to accommodate, not only the innovations of the day, but those of the day before.

The forces of modernity are too powerful to trifle with. The modern student cannot afford to be uncritical. The modern school cannot afford to be unconscious. Even if the school cloisters the student away from the world, then the student returns to the world, having had the advantage of having seen another, it will not be enough. Probably the forces of the world will prove far more powerful than four years in a Christian college. And in the improbable event that they do not, the student will emerge from college not knowing what to do. Not having learned the relation between the culture he has been initiated into and the culture that is all around him, he will not know how to interact with the latter. Rather than, with discernment, going along here, where it is harmless to do so, resisting there, fighting tooth and nail over yonder, not partaking further on, he is likely to yield too often, out of sheer want of information. It is no good introducing a student into Christian culture, if he is to be released into a modern world, with no idea how to live in it as a Christian.
