---
layout: post
title: "Against Utilitarianism"
description: "One of the difficulties in criticizing utilitarianism is the remarkable ease with which it changes form..."
---

One of the difficulties in criticizing utilitarianism is the remarkable ease with which it changes form. One thinks one has it pinned here, having proved that life without ethics is anarchy, when lo! the utilitarians counter by saying that they have always believed the same, and that they object to anarchy, it being unpleasant. Or one attacks from another angle, and shows definitively that man may act in perfectly selfless fashion—and the utilitarians say, “Sure he can. But only when it makes him happy.” Thus it is necessary to strike utilitarianism where it is weakest, on the plane of broad philosophical soundness. One could point out, for instance, that man does not always act with a view to maximizing his happiness, nor should he, but instead with voluntary deference to the order of things. One could also take a related but different tack, and indicate that knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning as ends are much to be preferred to happiness.

I have suggested that utilitarianism may be sophisticated to a nearly infinite degree. Some forms are no better than hedonism. Others may propose that pain is often necessary in the short term in order to achieve happiness in the long term; that man requires indirect goals other than happiness in order to be truly happy; even that man requires by nature some sort of extra-utilitarian ethic. The matter becomes more complicated when we probe into the nature of happiness. Certainly a person may be happy, while another looks on with utter abhorrence at the life he is living. If the one lived the other’s life, he too would be happy, perhaps happier than he is now, but he would never choose to live it. This is an extreme example, but I think we may propose as a general rule that anyone who has once lived a _broader_ or _fuller_ life will not then be satisfied with living a _narrower_ or _emptier_ one. The Christian saint might be the happiest of us all. Or happiness might not be the proper metric.

A full life is not lived in a bubble. To be utterly disconnected from reality, as in Huxley’s dystopia, is nearly a nightmare to those observing from the outside. Only from the outside can the objective nature of the thing be known. We need not enter Huxley’s world to be disconnected from reality. There are gradations of disconnection ascending all the way up to the most fundamental, tangible connection to the reality of things.

A full life embraces knowledge, since knowledge is the material of man’s whole intellectual life. Knowledge sets man apart from the beasts, allowing him, though finite, to become infinitely more than he is, by embracing the universe. Without knowledge of what is, man is a cipher; with knowledge, he expands his being, but in so doing, increases his share of responsibility. It now becomes his duty to act in accordance with what is—to act morally.

At any rate, a full life is inconceivable without virtue. In amoral terms, virtue is the exercise of the faculties in accordance with perfect excellence. Excellence is one aspect of fullness. In moral terms, virtue is necessary to the completion of duty. It is a duty in itself to cultivate virtue, since to do otherwise would be to waste the life we are given.

To live a full life, one does not remain disengaged—one must commit. And to commit is to love. Just as man expands his being, and takes up, in a sense, a stake in the universe, through knowledge; so, through love, man gains a stake in other creatures like himself, as well as in the local world around him. To not love is to be alone and rootless—and ultimately a selfish, mean, petty, and ignoble creature. To love is to have a stake in the world—and thus to live a fuller life.

To live a full life, one must also pursue meaning. The pursuit of meaning is nothing more than the name we give to the asking of the biggest questions there are. When we ask why we are here, we are asking a question that conditions everything else we do, and thus without which action is impossible. To ignore the question is not to become enlightened, it is to become a brute—the toy of our animal nature, rather than the architect of our destiny. To ponder the meaning of life is to wrap our mind around the greatest thing, and thus to live the fullest possible life, depending on the answer we arrive at.

Knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning are the intangible qualities of a full life. That they bear much fruit in the world, that they are made manifest in a variety of ways, need only be mentioned in passing. We are concerned with ideas, with the spiritual realities that may be opposed to utilitarianism, not the practices.

A certain sense of desire and duty impels us to cultivate knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning. We live, we exist—but existence comes with a corresponding duty to make the most of it. Existence, in other words, is a great responsibility. However, we cannot know what responsibilities attend existence without knowledge.

Regardless of the order defined by instinct, reason informs us that knowledge must be cultivated before virtue, love, and meaning, since it is the condition of the other three qualities. We have a desire for knowledge; it is characteristic of humans to pursue it. One becomes a formed individual human being in part through the pursuit of it. But it should also be said, that unless we pursue knowledge, we can have no part of virtue, love, or meaning. It is obvious that we are defining knowledge in broad terms.

Knowledge is a necessary condition of virtue. Traditionally the pursuit and attainment of one form of knowledge has itself been a virtue—prudence. Prudence is the virtue of knowing how to live and what to do. With prudence, we learn the conditions of existence, including our own nature, as well as the particular conditions that face us at a given moment, that we may reconcile the two forms of knowledge. It is the application of principle (a form of knowledge) to particular circumstance (also a form of knowledge). Without prudence, justice, courage, and temperance would be at best a shot in the dark.

To know is to learn the terms of existence, which any reasonable person would want to observe. Thus knowledge of what is is the foundation of ethics. In order to be just, we must know the claims of others upon ourselves, and so forth.

Knowledge is a necessary condition of love. To love another person is to recognize the objective value of that person, then choose to affirm his or her being. But recognition of objective value is a form of knowledge. Thus love, in a traditional sense, is man’s highest pursuit, combining as it does both reason and will.

Knowledge is a necessary condition of the pursuit of meaning, of course, since any conclusions we reach are a form of knowledge.

We conclude it is our responsibility to pursue knowledge; and knowledge leads to virtue, love, and meaning. We also, of course, have an innate desire for moral excellence, true love, and a meaningful existence—which desires may serve as a spur to the pursuit of knowledge. It is our responsibility to pursue a full life, to the best of our abilities. And such a life is that most worth living.

The most intelligent form of utilitarianism would have us seek the fullest possible life. One might be content to spend his life in Sam’s Club or at the mall, but on the other hand, snails, I suppose, are content too.

It then becomes unclear whether we should help each other toward happiness or knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning. There is a distinct difference between the two approaches. The individual who pursues happiness might be happier than the individual who pursues knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning; but on the other hand, the latter individual might prefer his life, and look with horror on the other. And he might not be happy pursuing happiness. Which raises the question, does happiness make us happy? Or is happiness a pleasurable sensation gained from the pursuit and attainment of higher things? Certainly frivolous pursuits sometimes make us happy, but only in small doses, and in small doses, can we be sure they are frivolous?

At any rate, if we are to pursue full lives, not happiness directly, there is a danger of losing sight of the utilitarianism we started with. If we broaden the scope of our lives by pursuing knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning, and educate our children to do likewise, and structure society accordingly, I think we have long since ceased to be utilitarians. But how on earth can happiness not be the goal? What else could be?

We are left in the embarrassing position of wanting to pursue happiness, but of not quite knowing how, or even what happiness is. There are two utilitarian solutions to this. The first I think most utilitarians would reject. It is to structure society so as to produce individuals who have few aspirations beyond mere happiness. Set up a system of institutions in which people can be happy without knowing what they are missing. But then we shall have defeated our purpose. We shall have robbed individuals of something—perhaps even a chance at true happiness. Utilitarianism is supposed to be benevolent—not totalitarian. It is supposed to be the obvious solution to everything, not our recourse when we are robbed of everything else. And though individuals may be happy under this enforced utilitarianism, it is only through not knowing what they are missing.

The other utilitarian solution is simple. We grant freedom in these matters to the individual. You are free to pursue knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning, so long as you never infringe on the basic right of other individuals to choose differently. This expedient is misleading, since it assumes that individuals make choices entirely unbiased by the culture around them. The question is, do we foster a utilitarian culture or an ethical, religious culture? But the utilitarians are clever: they believe we can have a utilitarian culture, which remains structured around the utilitarian idea, composed of utilitarians, although the individual utilitarians are free to pursue anything they please, if it makes them happy.

These matters are very confusing. The moment we recognize the value of knowledge, virtue, love, and meaning, we are in a position to make value judgments, and approve or disapprove of individuals, depending on whether they choose a full life or, instead, happiness. Judgment does not imply an uncharitable or censorious spirit, but at the least it enables us to determine how best to structure society for the good of its members. It enables us to promote certain qualities over others, for the good of all concerned. It enables us to insist on standards from each other, rather than laxly tolerating everything.

It will be said that within a utilitarian system individuals may exhort others to adopt their private value systems as they will. Traditionally, individuals were permitted to take more vigorous action than this. At any rate, we see the questionable logic implied in advocating a value system that is not truly preferable to another. The grounds for preference in utilitarianism is the extent to which a value system contributes to happiness. This is partly a personal matter; there is no universally valid value system, other than the utilitarian system which opposes happiness to unhappiness.

Our contention is that the source of value is not happiness at all. And if this be so, it becomes yet more important to show that utilitarianism is not as accepting of diverse value systems as some would pretend. Utilitarianism proves to be a subtle form of coercion, which requires individuals to live in fidelity to it, as do other value systems. Our primary concern is with ethical values, since these are most injured by utilitarianism.

Say to a utilitarian, “What of people who desire more than happiness? What of ambitious individuals aspiring to moral excellence? According to you, they must simply get in line with the system,” and he will respond, “No, no, you misunderstand. Utilitarianism is a baseline. But from that baseline, the individual is free to live the life he chooses. That is the beauty of it all. He is not bound by the ethical codes of others, but he is still free to live by any ethical code he likes. He can be a stoic or an epicurean, a Roman Catholic or a rake. Only he must not tell others what _they_ can be.” In other words, he may be as ethical as he pleases, only he mustn’t suppose his ethical code is universal or objective.

The most generous form of utilitarianism begins to have no content. Or at least it appears that way. It is benevolence itself. We are all free to pursue happiness in our own way. That is the sum of it. You be happy, and I shall be happy, as long as we do not interfere with each other’s happiness. This form of utilitarianism is so generous that it even would have us live by any ethical code we like. If our code is too strict, the utilitarians may be mildly shocked, but they will not interfere. So they claim at least, and whether or not it is true, the whole thing is misleading. This form of utilitarianism does not grant us license to live according to our own ethical code. For there is one thing it does demand of us—that, though we adhere to a strict ethical code, we admit that in the end it is subjective. But no one wants to live by a subjective ethical code.

Once utilitarianism becomes generally accepted, everyone realizes that they have no choice but to be a utilitarian. Otherwise, they will be living by a subjective ethical code. In which case, it will not be an ethical code at all but fantasy. And no one wants to live by fantasy. We want to live according to the objective order of things. But if we declare that our code is objective, and it encompasses more than utilitarianism, we shall have repudiated utilitarianism. And the utilitarians will not be happy about that.

In a utilitarian society, everyone is a utilitarian. Anyone otherwise cannot be accepted as a part of society. That would be to have an objective and universal ethical code that encompasses more than utilitarian values. It would be to say, effectively, that any who do not recognize it are wrong, any who do not live by it are sinners (though ignorance may go a long way as an excuse). It would be to exclude people. And it is precisely this exclusion of people, who are pursuing happiness in their own way, that utilitarians cannot tolerate.

Witness this in their disposition toward the churches. “You may,” they are told, “have your religious freedom. Your religious freedom we shall defend to the death. You are free to do as you choose, in the name of your religion. But when it comes to it, do not say that others are not also free to do as they choose.” They will defend religious freedom in the abstract, but in the end, the content of that freedom is objectionable to them. The abstract right is defended, but the actual exercise is found problematic. Were any church to stand up and say, “Gay marriage is universally and unequivocally wrong. That is a judgment. That has implications which we intend to carry out in our own communities, and which we think the world ought to fall in line with for its own good. Many things are wrong. We all of us commit sins. And we may commit them in ignorance, in which case they are not yet sins at all. But in the end, we believe that it is a universal truth that gay marriage is wrong;” were a church to say this, the utilitarians would jump at its throat.

They would say, “That is not fair. You have betrayed us. We protected your right to religious freedom. And you did not return the favor. You did not protect our right, but rather, you actively denounced our right to make personal ethical decisions.”

Thus everyone supports the right of churches to religious freedom. No one supports them when they actually use that freedom. That is not fair. They are not holding up their end of the bargain. They are supposed to use their freedom to—do what? Apparently to think the same things and say the same things and do the same things that the rest of us do.

Either way, ultimately a society that accepts utilitarianism will cease to be anything but utilitarian. Eventually it will come to the point where anyone who has a stricter ethical code than the officially sanctioned one is not only seen as wrong, but as downright unethical. However quiet and unassuming they are about it, they will be denounced. They have committed the only sin in a tolerant world: intolerance. They will be universally hated, for all will know instinctively that whatever may be said to the contrary, they are the enemy: they stand against everything society stands for.

In the past, every ethical system was an ethical system by virtue of claiming to be universal. In other words, each was exclusive of every other. Now, utilitarianism professes generosity—it pretends that we may hold to any ethical system we like, only we must not believe it is universal. But then it is not an ethical system at all. Utilitarianism is no different from any other ethical system that claimed to be universal—only it is stripped down. Other ethical systems may have been wrong, but they all were generally convinced that ethics is something important, that its demands on us are great. Utilitarianism, however, says, “No, no, you have got it all wrong. Ethics is simply a tool for us to live together in harmony. It has nothing to do with the perfection of man. In the end, it is not that important.” Thus it is the difference between error, but error pushing in the right direction, and complacent error that enforces moderation on any high achiever.

The utilitarians do not think ethics is that important. Why does the focus have to be on ethics? Why can we not live a full life, but jettison the ethical considerations? Why not have a utilitarian code of ethics, while pursuing knowledge, love, beauty, and other goods that lead to happiness?

Knowledge comes with a responsibility to act according to it. One who knows the duties of life and flouts them is morally culpable. We moderns often attempt to separate fullness or goodness of life from good morals, via some mechanism such as aestheticism, or temporal/spatial metaphors (_e.g._ “_beyond_ good and evil,” “_super_-man” or “_over_-man,” “_higher_ existence,” &c.). But this is not the correct approach. It is not that good morals are the defining characteristic of a full life, but that a full life without them is either not full at all, or is so irresponsible as to be diabolic.

With existence comes the possibility of a full life, and even the responsibility to live something like it. A full life implies knowledge of what is. Knowledge of what is implies good morals—since morals derive from what truly is. Thus a full life implies good morals. An attempt at a full life without good morals would be despicable. There would be no excuse for immoral conduct but one’s own wickedness, toward which one would assume an air of indifference.

One should always beware of an all-encompassing system of philosophy that prides itself on being easygoing. It is nice to be easygoing as a respite from the strenuousness of life, but as an all-encompassing system—one must ask—when do things get serious?
