---
layout: post
title: "Unity, Unity, Unity"
description: "I suppose one ought not to blame man for seeking palliatives, panaceas, pain-killers when confronted with unfortunate realities..."
---

I suppose one ought not to blame man for seeking palliatives, panaceas, pain-killers when confronted with unfortunate realities. These, however, will always be with us, since we have yet to find a cure for evil.

Division, one likes to imagine, might just disappear were we all to somehow quit being obstinate, and come together, “unite.” Everyone invokes that word, “unity,” and no one knows how to accomplish it, because we are all confused as to the nature of the disease. We blame Joe Biden, or Donald Trump, for being “divisive,” but how are they to be otherwise? Certainly needlessly “divisive” rhetoric is irresponsible, pointed partisanship is divisive, and scorched-earth principles are unnecessary. Institutions that stoke artificial flames of liberal moral furor are divisive, I suppose. But fundamentally our culture is divided.

In a divided culture, the only way for unity to be attained is for one side to win. I leave it an open question whether we are truly divided. It seems evident we are. I certainly hope so. Otherwise, behold the monolith of progressivism! Evil has triumphed universally! Without a doubt, the College Graduates among us are true-blue progressives, while some of us are still uncomfortable around evil, hideousness, callow philosophies, &c. That institutions are responsible for the divide goes without saying. Also that a minority of individuals run our institutions. One might say our leaders are dividing us, but it would be more correct to say our culture has been corrupted—witness our institutions—as part of the global rush for enlightenment, progress, other chimeras—therefore we are divided. Most of us have only power to make sure we are on the right side.

Though people are firmly fixed in their fundamental beliefs, they are fluid in their secondary beliefs. Polls cannot capture the extent of our division. One day a poll shows an incredible majority of us are against packing the Supreme Court. This does not capture context. The next day, Democrats in office pack the court, and Democrats on the street have faint, momentary misgivings, before supporting it on the grounds that Chuck Schumer says it is necessary to ensure “women’s reproductive healthcare” and other rights that troglodytes on the Court would abolish. To mark off a binary answer to an abstract, hypothetical question not yet really embedded in current political debate is no sure method of capturing nuance. How much does the notion of packing the Court horrify Democrats on the street? Not much, I venture. It is mere human nature, true at all times, and might be said of Republicans too, although Republican leadership is far from radical, that people follow their leaders.

I suspect that one should not fret too much over poll results. People have all manner of “extreme” beliefs that flit in and out of their heads, which it might be better not to know of. They entertain harmless conspiracy theories. When a paper is put before them with questions, and they know their answer will have no actual influence on affairs, they are apt to write anything. The impressionable nature of a democratic public has been well known throughout history, for which reason we do not have a democracy. Polls, then, are only so useful—and decidedly less useful than a study of the visible, macro-affairs that occur. Sure, were politics conducted by referendum—without institutional context—anarchy would ensue. That is why we have institutions, the study of which is far more useful than the study of the passing judgment of crowds.

Again, public opinion is malleable. The great majority may theoretically oppose late-term abortion. But does their blood cry out against it when it happens? Tepid public sentiment will never prevent evil. Besides, how will the public feel in ten years? That is progress: do it now, and people will support it later. People are gullible, confused in their beliefs, wishy-washy, complacent with regard to some issues, furious others—and through it all, we are divided.

Call it the genesis of totalitarianism, or what you will, but when _White Fragility_ sells millions of copies, and School Boards or libraries vote unanimously to be absurd, I cannot but think that our problems go deeper than mere leadership. In other words, we are divided. Perhaps institutional pressures are dividing us—the solution to which is not psychology, but individual courage and conviction—but regardless, people we know sign their names to radical things, opposed by the rest of us. We are divided.

Given that we are divided, what do we do about it? Nothing, for there is no compromise with evil—not evil hell-bent on tearing things down and imposing itself on human affairs anyway. The left is not going to back down, and neither should we. “Can’t we just get along,” is the most pathetic and impotent wail ever to ride on man’s breath. The answer is, no! so man up, and fight evil.

But in order for us to be united, one side has to win. The Sixties and Seventies were resolved not because people calmed down, but because the radicals won. They have won innumerable victories since, and they are trying to win again. There is some truth in the idea of a “pendulum swing” from radicalism, for instance, back to conservatism, a generational shift brought on by the consequences of ideas. But if we all sit around and wait for it to happen, it never will. Our consciences enjoin us to resist evil. Much evil will be done on this side of the pendulum swing. And there is always the possibility that civilization will decline unto collapse. In other words, evil will not take care of itself, but is defeated when men resist it with wholehearted strength.

Were the radical ideas of the left to be kept out of practical politics, it would a victory for conservatives, at the expense of liberals. Were they to be wrought upon the world, it would be a victory for the left, at the expense of the rest of us. There is no hope of compromise, because compromise in these cases is always temporary. In an ideologically or philosophically divided society, compromise is a victory for one side, and launching pad for further victories.

“Moderation” is not a solution. It is the most radically unpopular of ideologies. Practically no one supports it. That is not quite true: only lethargic people support it, people tired of fighting “progress.” But we must have a will to resist evil, for these days “moderation” means slow defeat and death by strangulation for conservatives and, especially, Christians. Rule from the center satisfies nobody. What does it even mean? Are we to be half-socialists?

We must fight, not because we foresee victory, but because our consciences so direct us. We know liberal policies are calamitous and evil, though they are also ascendant. We know we are divided, so we ought to align ourselves with good, and fight evil. (This is never to say that one side is wholly good, the other wholly evil: only that the moral issues are often pretty clear.)

Persuasion, effective governance, national success—these are all ways of fighting. Insofar as we are successful, the left will increase the heat and pressure. But fight we must, since tolerable unity only ever comes about through victory. That is how wars, even “culture wars” are decided. The alternative is intolerable unity—capitulation, total submission, at the extreme, totalitarianism.
