---
layout: post
title: "On Orthodoxy"
description: "For as long as I can remember, I have had the distinct feeling—indeed, the almost implicit assumption—that there is something wrong with modernity..."
---

>This essay was written and submitted to a college as an application essay. I publish it here because it includes key elements of my philosophy. (It has some rough spots, but I got in.)

For as long as I can remember, I have had the distinct feeling—indeed, the almost implicit assumption—that there is something wrong with modernity. Of course man since he first walked on earth has been hankering after the golden age that preceded these degenerate days. Corruption and folly are always unique to the time we live in. We look to the time before for innocence, purity, wisdom. “O tempora! O mores!”—thus do we, when afflicted with the sense that the world is somehow inadequate, lament by way of consolation the peculiar inadequacy of the present age.

But this ritual lamentation is not entirely without cause, since every age has its unique problem. The present age is extraordinary. The victories of modern science in the war with nature and death do honor to mankind. The steady progress of civilization has swept over the seven continents, establishing in its wake edifices and institutions such as would astonish our forefathers. But it would be folly to describe the glacial movements that mightily ground back and forth, back and forth across New England, during the most recent ice age, without mentioning once the tiny earthworms that in those momentous times were driven South, and have yet to return from their pilgrimage to places they were wont to dwell. And it would be no less foolish to celebrate the victorious procession of science, without pausing a moment to ask about the individuals marching in the parade. Naturally modernity has many advantages for the individual. Good doctors and air conditioning are a blessing. But as matter accumulates, it is important to remember that man does not live by bread alone.

So one must ask, “Have modern philosophy and religion served man well?” It is not necessary to examine every sordid small treatise or great discourse in the history of modern philosophy. One need only look to the general spirit. And doing so, the consensus of modern philosophy seems to be this: that man is a cipher in a void. He is a lonely spark in the dark night of eternity. His is a fugitive breath in a vacuum. In short, he is terribly free to do as he chooses, but what he does doesn’t matter two bits.

This sort of philosophy has always distressed, and has at times exceedingly puzzled me. How is it that those who espouse it (and who, quite often, also disenfranchise themselves of free will, and everything else that makes life worth living) are as often as not bouncing, ebullient fellows, ruddy, with big grins, and cheerful as can be? Surely nihilism isn’t all sunshine and roses? But these are questions even more profound than the main: How should we conduct ourselves on earth?

The most distressing thing about this sort of Liberty in the Void, is that it strikes one as entirely unnecessary. It is a picture of despair, where joy would be perfectly appropriate. It is liberation, where the order of nature might be sought. I, for one, have certainly felt that, for all the talk of “liberation,” there is nothing liberating about it. It is liberty to be frightened, selfish, and alone. It is the sort of liberty that man has labored for thousands of years to avoid.

This is the problem that once weighed heavily upon me. I had a faint premonition that the answer lay in tradition. But could this be all? After all, tradition, if not the accidental alluvium built up by time, is nothing more than a superstructure floating in midair, unless it has a solid base of true ideas to rest on. A thing is not good because it is old and hallowed, it is good because it is true.

These things considered, when I first took up Gilbert Keith Chesterton’s _Orthodoxy_, I was well-disposed to enjoy and profit from it immensely. Chesterton is known as the master of paradox. His paradoxes, however, are truly a product of superior wisdom. Where others take a fuzzy-eyed view of things, Chesterton draws finer distinctions. He clears himself, early on in the book, of the charge of trifling with “mere light sophistry,” which he says he too finds contemptible. Chesterton’s paradoxes are precisely of the sort necessary to find joy in life, rather than despair.

The central paradox of the book is given in the first chapter: it is how to at once stand in awe of the universe and be at home in it. This struck me as the solution to Liberty in the Void. An atom floating in empty space is neither at home nor in awe of its surroundings. Chesterton, who wants nothing to do with atoms, rather preferring human beings, endeavors to show how life can be a romance, rather than a tragic dance of particles as described by Robert Brown.

“Joy through paradox” is one possible summary of Chesterton’s writings. “At home in fairyland” is another. Chesterton, very early on in the book, succeeds in transforming the world into a place of magic. Life is an “eccentric gift”—like a winged horse. But, he says, one mustn’t look a winged horse in the mouth. Thus the appropriate complement to wonder and gratitude is a sort of reverence and respect for things as they come.

Chesterton proceeds, through true paradox, to make a home of the world. It seems to me that for the past couple hundred years, everyone has been exalting one principle or another to a position of exclusive sovereignty. Then, though some have persevered in the perilous practice, we discovered that was a terrible idea. Now everyone is declaring that two opposite principles should offset each other in a state of tension. A reasonable amount of humility should offset a reasonable amount of pride. But Chesterton finds the principle that mediates between the two principles, thereby establishing both order and subtlety. The result, he tells us, is orthodoxy. It is a system of philosophy, or rather, a religion, so perfectly balanced as to satisfy the contradictory needs of man, rational or otherwise. It is a system that tells us precisely the place for humility, and the place for pride.

I have said that Chesterton makes the world a home. But he does not go so far as to make it a humdrum establishment. It is a temporary home. It is not a home that we are doomed to live in—for who would want to be doomed to live in such a miserable world? But at the same time, who would not want to live in such a wonderful world? It is a home that we can truly love because we know we do not belong to it. It is a home that we can truly hate because we know we do not belong to it. It is a wonderful creation that has gone terribly wrong. Thus we can wonder at it, but we can also know that it has gone wrong.

How wonderful is orthodoxy! And how much more wonderful in being old! I think it satisfies every human need, however contradictory. It even satisfies the need to rebel and the need to conform; the need for radicalism and the need for tradition. There is nothing more radical than orthodoxy. There has never, as Chesterton points out, been anything more perilous and exciting.

Unfortunately, I have no idea what to do with this information. That is a problem for the future.
