---
layout: post
title: "Progressivism and Truth"
description: "There is no political designation so arrogant as “progressive”..."
---

There is no political designation so arrogant as “progressive.” It is used by men so out of touch with all thought broaching the boundaries of their own small circle that they genuinely and honestly believe the cultural world is a dichotomy between progressive intellectuals and the forces of blind reaction. They are unaware that an educated person could differ from them in fundamentals. This unawareness of any legitimate culture outside the liberal culture of all educated people—with the same liberal ideology pounded into their skulls by Institutions of Higher Learning—characterizes the liberal on the street as well. Progressives (or liberals: the terms are interchangeable) have never doubted that the world is theirs.

Progressivism—working backward from the word’s etymology—may, variously, equate progress with change as such; endorse the specific direction wherein change is occurring, seems likely to occur, or ought to occur; prefer that the ideal be continually moved, rather than merely that the real move to better accord with the ideal; prefer that lower level ideals be continually moved to better accord with higher philosophical premises; or (what may in fact be the case) prefer that change be confused but always rushing onward—change, even oscillation of ideals, change of reality, change of everything according to the common judgment of enlightened opinion.

Only a wholly unethical person would support change as such—whether of the real or the ideal. Progressivism in the past may sometimes have heralded the increased production and consumption of matter as the measure of civil society. “Progressivism” was also a name for a movement which took its ideals from the past and sought to inscribe them on a bright future toward which they looked optimistically. But we are concerned with progressivism in the present. It seems to me that progressives are continually altering their practical ideals because their philosophical ideals are too ambiguous to inform their action consistently.

Contemporary progressives are continually changing their ideals and, in real time, seeking to impress them on the living fabric of society. They have no concept that some people have fixed ideals, the physical embodiment and general acceptance of which lie in the past, receding present, or at any rate not the future. We are moving toward a new world, and not everyone who resists it is a reactionary. Or perhaps reaction is appropriate—though the term is ambiguous. Progressives are arrogant because they believe Reason, which inspires them, dictates a bright future spun out of their light skulls, and anyone who opposes is a mere unimaginative boor, or worse, bigot.

But the use of the term progressive brings to light a major division in American politics. Progressives are willing to move their practical ideals (which govern action, as opposed to their more remote philosophical ideals). They even reinterpret history in light of their progressivism. Thus the Founding Fathers, they say, would be progressives now, because they supposedly were then, even though any man can plainly see that the Founding Fathers would be extreme reactionaries if transposed into our time. Progressives continually move the ideal, because they do not believe in truth. In other words, they do not believe in truth; therefore they are progressives; and only one limitation restrains the oscillation of their practical ideals—that these must move in line with their relativism.

I have written much about liberalism, progressivism, utilitarianism, &c. In practice, I treat these as all the same, because they are all founded on denial of truth. The denial of truth is relativism, consistent relativism is nihilism, and the only logical conclusion of nihilism is suicide. To commit suicide, actively or passively in a puddle of despair, is, I repeat, the only logical action for one who denies truth. As a corollary, it follows that no other action is logical, except perhaps as a step to the grave. Thus—which is my main point—we ought not to expect consistency from any philosophy that denies truth. They are all the same—and will all be marked by the same casting about in despair, seizing on pseudo-intellectual philosophies, inconsistency, movement and oscillation of practical ideals, and evil fruits.

Progressives believe there is no truth, only power. As some have rightly pointed out, this is quite literally Satanic. The Serpent in the Garden whispered in Eve’s ear that His Truth and Goodness are not the basis of God’s sovereignty, and pointed instead to the mere fact of His power. Ye can be as Gods if you only deny truth—ye can be as devils if you only assert power. Progressives believe hierarchies may not be the embodiment of a universally objective value system—the embodiment of truth—but are rather systems of oppression. It is often mistakenly thought that belief in truth precludes the use of power. Actually, the use of power according to and even in the cause of truth is noble. Power in the cause of innocent or vulnerable truth, goodness, beauty characterizes masculinity at its finest. Power according to—nay, even by—truth is the right and authority of God. Established power under truth is the definition of political sovereignty.

But progressives do not believe in truth. They think the world can perpetually be made a better place by conceding to the demands of people with the right politics. Anyone with a fixed view of life quickly becomes a reactionary. Thus not only specific beliefs, but the belief in truth itself comes under attack—as progressivism lays waste to the whole array of beliefs. Even truth as method, process, or procedure is not secure. Of course the believer in truth has always been pitted against the entire world, but he is all the more pitted against progressives, who not only deny truth, but deny knowing that others are still believers.
