---
layout: post
title: "The Age of Activism"
description: "We live in the age of activism—which means we also live in the age of ugliness, crudity, utilitarianism, uniformity, hateful, hateful things by the score..."
---

We live in the age of activism—which means we also live in the age of ugliness, crudity, utilitarianism, uniformity, hateful, hateful things by the score. These are strangely unselfish times, even as they are colossally selfish. Everyone is looking out for the selfish desires of everyone else out of a compulsion for meaningful activity. Thus we all create disorder and misery in a frenzied rush of altruism.

The good society is founded on truth, truth, the resort of the individual. The properly ordered individual human soul is the true foundation of the Christian commonwealth. This proper ordering cannot be proper, unless we account for the social nature of man. Thus true individualism impels us to be communitarians.

In our age, the social order is given precedence over the individual. Everyone is creating happiness for everyone else, making us all miserable. The social order is engineered so as to render license a god. But license is a god who works in the interstices of consent and interpersonal activity—leaving the individual without instruction, formless as water, without joy, content, happiness. Theoretically, if we can only put at the service of each individual the maximum resources of society, clear the way for an orgy of self-expression, individuals—forgotten in the general rush—will at least be able to drown in delusions of freedom and happiness, and so be oblivious to the greater happiness that comes with the restraint of truth.

Activism, for greater license and freedom for others, increasingly is sought for its own sake, or for the sake of the sense of meaning it bestows. License means the freedom to melt into a puddle of water. Freedom means the freedom to be indeterminate in a determinate world. Thus the oppressed individual is no longer happy for knowing the Kingdom of Heaven can be his even in his lowly state. The poor individual is no longer content to fulfill his nature in tolerable conditions, albeit unfair, but is aching for power and burning for wealth. The individual uniquely situated is restless for a more typical perch. Duty is lost in a flurry of rights, and no one is the happier for it. The spirit of protest gets what it wants, but does it not, even so, miss out on something more important still? Are the individuals who flaunt themselves in the streets properly ordered according to the divine light of truth? Can this, then, be rightly said to be an individualistic society? Not if individuals are abandoned in the furious chase, using illicit means, after social good, which proves a chimera.
