---
layout: post
title: "On Identity"
description: "More even than that Sacred Triad, Diversity, Inclusivity, Equality (DIE), Identity is sacred to the political left..."
---

More even than that Sacred Triad, Diversity, Inclusivity, Equality (DIE), Identity is sacred to the political left. To step on a person’s identity is to spiritually murder that person. This would seem almost Christian, except that by negating the grounds of human dignity, which is objective being, it throws us into a confusion of subjectivism, tolerance, bigotry, a heavy yoke of untruth, and patronizing tones for dissenters. Subjectivism saddles a person with falsehood by offering no clear path to objective truth. Tolerance and bigotry are two flip sides of a coin. And patronizing tones are the bread and butter of liberals. They do not believe in truth, and find it unreasonable and disruptive when others, forced, point out that they do.

Even conservatives are afflicted with an over-psychologized view of man, which makes them ascribe motives to some deeper, more insidious process than reason and choice. Even self-deception partakes of reason, because it is a willful choice (redundant, but necessary, given the cheapening of the word “choice”) not to use reason. No one blames a friend who refuses him a ride on the grounds that he has no car. But we do blame a friend who has a car. Thus to blame error on the labyrinthine paths of human psychology is to forget that we have a car—reason.

We also have undue concern for the tender human psyche. A little discipline never hurt anyone, but psychology will have its way. Thus modern moralizing is psychological. One would never want to tread down the delicate lilies of the field. A child’s psyche is no less delicate. The modern psyche is powerful, because we give it power, when we might discipline it with reason. Thus we create the beast which later serves as an excuse for our inhumanity.

Evidence continues to flood in: modern man is not concerned with reason, but first and foremost with his psychological health and well-being. The new science of psychology offers him nearly infinite avenues of escape from the powerful guns that are leveled at utilitarianism, atheism, and other modern follies. Finally it offers an escape from reason itself—as well as the responsibility to pursue truth and meaning. It is a serpentine tool, devilish.

Psychology as we have it is a pseudo-intellectual profession. One of its fruits is “identity.” The very word identity already tells of a departure from ancient notions of an integrated human nature. Man no longer has an essence—which defines him—but an identity—which describes him. It may even be self-description. His reason, volition, emotion, psychology—all the facets of his being no longer constitute one whole. He has a knotty skein of a self which must be respected.

Any individual may be found at the cross-hairs of many characteristics, which together constitute his identity. He is integrated into the external world only to the extent that he shares an identity with members of a group. He is no longer integrated into the universe by common descent from the Creator of all things.

Any concept of an objective, ordered universe is inimical to this kind of identity. Man no longer has a choice what competing strands should be woven into his nature, and the very competition of several strands suggests inadequacy and failure. The modern victim of his identity would have been considered undisciplined—still a child—in the past. It is manly to brave nature on one united front.

Human nature implies an integrated essence and a place in the broader scheme of nature. “Personality” implies a God-given self, unique, inalienable, wonderful. Man has a nature, men have personalities. Without a nature, we would be mere subjective drifters. Without a personality, we would be mere constrained robots, without value but as a race. At the core of personality sit reason, will, love, and what is indivisible in man: his soul.

Identity stands outside both the beauty of the type and the beauty of the individual. It is mere eccentricity and illusion, mere scattered impulse. A person may identify as what have you. But then he is a mere fanciful object borne upon the tide of being. Not every identity is available to a person living in an ordered universe.

Nor is every identity open to a person living in an ordered society. One cannot identify as something one has never heard of. “Gender-transcendent mermaid queen-kings” never used to exist. One cannot identify as something one did not know one might be. Thus “transgenderism” is the privilege of a disordered society. Time was people had real problems. Time was people made real decisions. But now, where every alternative is on the table, we have the luxury of exploring possibilities that never existed.

People are shaped by their culture. The “open society,” where one might browse for personal truth and identity, is a myth. No one was an astronaut before space travel. Had he been, he would have been derided as immature and fanciful. To put every possibility before a person without comment is to imply that all are equally valuable and ordinary. To “normalize” pathology is to change it and everything else besides. Transgenderism defeats itself when finally forced to assert, “there is no gender,” since “gender” is fluid. The only reason for “identifying” as a man or a woman when one is one, that it is true and normal, then vanishes. When the truth is no longer given pride of place, it becomes something different altogether. It is like defining a God that one does not yearn for. Such a God could not be the Christian God.

The “Q” in “LGBTQ+,” as I am informed, may stand for either “queer” or “questioning.” Now who in his right mind would question? Certainly not someone in an ordered, settled society, which if nothing else favors truth under doubt.

Identity is a good concept for describing the contingent nature of the universe. We are not individuals created in a vacuum, but in a given time and place, under variable conditions. It is good that it should be so. Thus we have an identity—defined by nationality, allegiances, culture, sex, affections, &c. But man as animal with identity is man bereft of value and dignity. He is a mere idiosyncratic atom—dust to return to dust, incoherently cobbled together to form a whole.
