---
layout: post
title: "Notes on Superstition"
description: "It is universally agreed upon that superstition is bad..."
---

It is universally agreed upon that superstition is bad. Some, the Christians, maintain charity toward the uneducated and poor. Others deride them, by way of proving how much better a person atheism makes you. Some even believe there are insights to be gained by the uncultured mind that half an education often dispels. Again, those others prove their humility in the face of the vast complexity of being by arrogating unto their own small band all possible insight.

These humble, religious, and in all earnestness well-meaning men propose to raze all superstition from the earth, by means of universal scientific education. Of course it is worth asking whether it is better to remove superstition by means of true, pure faith or with the content of so-called “rationalism.” Is it better to strip the rude ornaments from religion and let it show in its strong, native colors, or kill religion and superstition both with one stroke?

Remarkable as it is, one notices an advanced degree of totemism in certain advocates of scorched-earth Enlightenment, such as only a College Education could bestow. One sometimes gets the feeling those who chide others to greater intellectual honesty are not being perfectly honest themselves—when they bend the knee to the fashion of the moment. Certainly there is a reason why we capitalize Reason and Science, adding two deities to a feast of the gods which includes Darwin and the European Union. But allowing the atheists to be emotionally unattached, we still must ask if their program of disillusionment is good for people.

Putting aside the question of whether it is easier to make rationalists or enlightened Christians, we certainly may say the dangers of the former are many. If second-rate Christians (in the worldly sense endorsed by snide characters like Sam Harris) are superstitious, second-rate atheists are nihilists and school-shooters, or they simply have disordered and miserable lives. One had rather have the lineaments of the true faith than an unsubtle version of a distressing philosophy. It takes all manner of logical wangling rooted in rich traditional soils and bucketloads of education to be an enlightened atheist. For the most part atheists are not the happiest people.

Education into truer religion does not come with the same danger as education into secular science and reason: that of lapsing into a scientific technocracy. Education into truer religion gives increased reliance on individual conscience. It puts the individual in direct relationship with God—and is thus more radically individualistic than any secular imitation could approach being. Secular rationalism requires us to put our faith in science, meaning, in practice, scientists. “Trust the experts” uncritically is the usual final sequence of rational secularism for the laity.

Some might object that the Church is totalitarian. But the Church defines matters of faith and morals in accordance with truth (“the truth will set you free”). It frees the individual’s conscience. The Church is also subservient to God—scientific technocracy is subservient to man. No one who has seen the implications of these two allegiances play out will doubt of the importance of the distinction.

Finally, the superstitious are better company than the atheists—not only because the latter know everything, but because the former are right about the most important things, even while lovably erring in the details. The superstitious are colorful, the atheists bland uniformitarians. The former at least are pluralists, the latter monists one and all. The former may progress from a peripheral pluralism to a fundamental pluralism of personality, the latter—well, it is better to speak of them as little as possible. It is safe to assume that everything they say is the exact opposite of the truth. They are the only thing worse than uniform—uniformly wrong. It is, needless to say, the hardened atheists of which we speak.

The superstitious may exercise the will on behalf of the good. Knowledge may not be within their ambit, but they at least do what they can with their own life to choose good rather than evil. It is better to point them toward a higher, stronger, truer, purer good than to burst their illusions with a cynical laugh. (Anyone who doubts that hardened atheists have cynical laughs should spend more time with them.)
