---
layout: post
title: "The Pomegranate Eaters"
description: "Jacob Thricely was traveling through an obscure place, when he stumbled upon the provinces of night..."
---

>This was written last year, pomegranate season.

Jacob Thricely was traveling through an obscure place, when he stumbled upon the provinces of night. The inn he had intended to stay at was thither, yonder, he knew not where. For he had taken a wrong turn somewhere along the way. “Calm your fretted head, Thricely,” he told himself, before casting about for a place to sleep. When the conquering sun regained its domain over the dew-brushed glebe, he, Jacob Thricely had no intention of being caught napping in a field.

His eye fell upon an angular shape, which he soon perceived to be a chimney, bound to the phenomenon of a house. It was a cheerful phenomenon, as he thought he saw through the gloom, delightfully boxy in shape, and culminating by a stolidly pitched roof to a point. Some whimsical spirit had painted it crimson red, though its hue was happily softened by the dusk. It had green-winged windows, a little chimney filled with roiling smoke, and a path which wandered superfluously, but nevertheless fulfilled its office, leading the chance pedestrian by many twists and turns to the door. Jacob supposed it was a cottage, and had friendly inhabitants, as all cottages have. Whereupon he strode up the meandering path, and knocked—for courtesy’s sake: it was a great big knocker—with his bare knuckles on the wood.

After some grumbling from within, the door opened to reveal a small, neat-looking man possessed of a book and a pair of piercing brown eyes, gabled by two furry black ridges, and raven hair. All else about the man was fair.

“I will forgive. ‘Tis the Christian thing to do,” said he. “But the very book commanding me thus did give the occasion for it, which had not been had I not been so rapt in it.” He held aloft, as he said this, the text whereof he spoke, professedly his teacher and his tempter both, and Jacob perceived it to be the Holy Bible. “James Cottfield begs the honor of your acquaintance,” he added, as an afterthought.

“Thricely. Jacob Thricely. I wonder if you might give room to a strayed pilgrim for the night. I intended to be elsewhere by day, but (as you see) I am here by night.”

“’Twould be night in that other place of yours, sure as here,” observed Mr. Cottfield. “But Thricely is a charming name. We can find room for a Thricely.”

So saying, he opened the door wider, and admitted Jacob into a small, firelit room. It was earthen floored, and had a square wood table as a centerpiece. Otherwise, it had cut-out walls, the definition of a single room. The family—for there was a family, consisting of a strong- and fine-featured mother; a boy in the vicinity of nine, who combined his parents in his person through the mechanism of a hearty bone structure surmounted by a shock of charcoal hair; and a wispy, blonde-haired girl with bright blue eyes, whose hair and eyes were a great wonder, dark being the mode in that family, and whose age might be pinned roughly at six—peeped out at Jacob from the garret, where they ordinarily slept, though at present they did no such thing. Sensing the six eyes upon him, Jacob looked towards the garret; whereupon the boy sharply withdrew, the girl nearly fell from her perch, and the mother steadied her with a hand. It seemed likely that, had the girl fallen, she would have floated gently to earth, like a fairy descending on a cowslip.

While Jacob was surveying the room, and receiving the scrutiny of its inhabitants, Mr. Cottfield had relapsed into his Bible. He started forth at the sound of his daughter’s near descent.

“O that you were like a brother to me, that nursed at my mother’s breast! I would give you spiced wine to drink, the juice of my pomegranates,” he cried, an ejaculation whereof Jacob took little notice, being used to the ways of eccentrics, but which he later perceived had been an omen of things to come. Then: "The pomegranates must wait upon the morrow, but a Christian’s duty by his brother knows not delay! This is Klara Cottfield. This is Tommy, Ruth. And this,” said he with a grand flourish, “is Thricely.”

At this peremptory introduction, Mrs. Cottfield smiled, and set herself to making Jacob as comfortable as she quietly could with politeness of expression and demeanor; Tommy withdrew from the stranger’s gaze; and Ruth fell from her perch. Mr. Cottfield, who had by now disburdened himself of his Bible, which lay open on the table, held out his arms to catch her, which he did. Jacob observed that, judging by her fall, she seemed to have a modicum of substance. Laughing, Mr. Cottfield set the child down. The girl was apparently not frightened, nor did any of the Cottfields act in such a way as to suggest the unordinary, nor startle nor scream as though anything more than a part of life had passed.

Mr. Cottfield having wondered, at the tacit bidding of his wife, whether Jacob had dined, and Jacob having assured him that he had, the three on the floor ascended to the loft, by the agency of a ladder. Jacob said his prayers, wished all a good night, and retired to the provinces of sleep.

When Jacob awoke, the room was bright with the risen sun. Looking about, he had just time to perceive a blonde wisp atop the latter, before it disappeared, leaving the place bare of Cottfields and unanimously filled with himself. Whereupon he raised himself up on all fours and crawled to the edge of the loft to see where his company had gone. Looking down, he beheld a strange sight. The four Cottfields—the fourth having just taken her place—were seated around the wood table, in what looked to be a solemn ritual of sorts. The focus of their gaze was a red object at the table’s center.

Jacob, eager to know the object of their reveries, descended to the floor in a manner evocative of a fall. It was a controlled one. Startled by the noise of his descent, the first Cottfield, James, awoke to the world, and casting his eyes to the foot of the latter, where Jacob had moments before alighted, spoke thus:

“Good morrow, good neighbor, and good morn. Good it is, and lucky, for he who now wakes to the crimson seed of the Lord’s fruit, as have you, Thricely.”

Jacob, wondering, peered at the fruit, and beheld that it was a pomegranate. Whereupon he said, in his most formal tone, “Though never have I tasted of the red fruit, I delight in being invited to join your solemn company—for I hope I err not in construing an invitation.”

“Construe rather an exhortation, Thricely, and you will not be in error.”

Having rendered all further discourse redundant, Mr. Cottfield procured a fifth chair, appending it to the table’s corner which lay betwixt himself and Tommy, while laying a hand upon Tommy’s shoulder, as if to restrain the child from bolting, which it seemed he might do. Jacob sat down, receiving as he did a lapcloth from Mrs. Cottfield. All was then silent for a span of time, as each fell to inward contemplation, and Jacob fell to wondering at the mysterious absorption and stillness of his companions. At a silent cue, the Cottfields resumed motion. Jacob resumed frankness of motion, being no longer compelled to dissemble stillness. Mr. Cottfield took hold of the ruddy centerpiece. He placed the fruit before him; set it a-whirl with a dexterous motion of the hand; procured a knife—finely wrought, with a ruby set in the handle. He stilled the vertiginous fruit; flourished the dagger thrice; then brought it to rest, poised like Damocles’ sword just above the condemned fruit. He paused for a brief instant of time, then set the world in motion once more, cleaving his sword from side to side like the blade of a windmill or a succession of images in a romantic dream. All was a dance of light as Mr. Cottfield’s limbs whirled about, in a blaze of continuous motion. A crimson light blew in eddies around the room, and other hues danced in prismatic display—light cleaved asunder by the sword of Cottfield. And as he cleaved light, so he cleaved the fruit with his sword—so struck it twice and thrice, till five equal portions were on the table before him. So gentle was his stroke, he did not once touch the table, nor spill a drop of blood.

Each Cottfield seized a portion, then Jacob his; whereupon they set themselves to their meal. Fingers danced into action, breaking the fruit along its natural lines, scraping seeds from the pith, and hurrying these to the mouth, all traveling their various ways in a flurry of motion, like shadows of a London street. Fingers moved rhythmically from fruit to mouth and thence to fruit, back and forth like trains along their track. A fantastic haze was in the air, permeant with red, and lit by a swath of sun from the window. The room was silent, but for the sound of fingers dissecting the crimson fruit and of the occasional seed plinking to the floor. It was a surreal scene, such as some romantic, caught in a transport of whimsy, might paint from his imagination. The rite had run its course, so Jacob thought, but another fruit appeared, was riven apart, and plucked bare by the company; then another; and finally, a fourth. The fourth fruit devoured, the fivesome relapsed into a state of content. Peace and goodwill dwelt among the company.

Within the hour, Jacob had set forth, with a direction corroborated by Mr. Cottfield, and a spirit emboldened by the sun, which blazed in a cloudless sky. He had parted from the Cottfields with humble thanks and sadness little justified by the brevity of their acquaintance. “Few strangers,” said Mr. Cottfield, addressing himself to Thricely as he left, “have partaken with us of the red fruit.”

Jacob humbly thanked him again, then betook himself to his path.

As he walked along, with the blue vault of the heavens above him, the green sprawling fields around him, the clean morning air filling his lungs, he thought of the Cottfields, and of the Cottfields’ pomegranates. Whereupon he smiled, and quickened his pace for his journey’s end.
