---
layout: post
title: "Where Do We Go From Here?"
description: "The conservative project has always been a critique of the Enlightenment in great part, and as such a critique of liberalism, classical, traditional, and modern..."
---

The conservative project has always been a critique of the Enlightenment in great part, and as such a critique of liberalism, classical, traditional, and modern. Classical liberalism is distinguished from traditional liberalism in its theoretically strict embrace of limited government and individual freedom; modern liberalism, at its most innocent, embraces the state as an engine of good; at its least innocent, it is insufferably elitist; (all forms of liberalism are imperialistic); whereas modern liberalism verges into Marxism, takes the concept of “psychological man” to absurdity, assimilates all manner of pseudo-intellectual concepts and philosophies, abandons the “open society” once and for all. Traditional liberalism is more consistent than classical liberalism. Modern liberalism is consistent unto absurdity, with all manner of wild appendages swinging off its rotten, cadaverous frame.

We may take as a premise that liberalism failed, speaking primarily of classical and traditional liberalism, which have much in common. Where do we go from here? “Liberalism” as a non-ideological fruit of Western Civilization, ought not to be thrown away entirely. The very flexibility of conservatism allows conservatives to defend “liberal” institutions while rejecting “liberalism” as an ideology. The conservative solution to the present moment is virtue—courageous defense of the good and true. This has nothing to do with “principle” as a passionate defense of petty procedure, mere method. We defend the good and true as embodied in Western Civilization and the Christian faith, and with principle designed otherwise than to cripple ourselves before any bold step. The serene reasonable tone of some conservative publications is not ours—the gentlemanly ideal is useless as civilization crumbles, if by “gentlemanly” we mean effetely polite—all men of action are now gunslingers, or they are not active, but passive, or impotently reactive. Handle a six-shooter on behalf of right order and truth. Hone your talents and become a walking arsenal—throwing traps left and right under the feet of liberalism, directing strategic forces down byways, or opening plain fire with your back against a wall.

For the present, it is certainly worthwhile to criticize liberalism, which in many ways is the most naive and foolish political system ever conceived.

It is hard to criticize liberalism as an ideology. One cannot, for instance, accuse it of being illiberal. On the other hand, that is not precisely true. A liberal regime imposes its terms on dissenters, like any other—though not quite in the same forceful and showy manner. Liberalism as an ideology leads to illiberalism. Liberalism is impotent to resist illiberalism—not manly enough. And one may criticize liberal ideology _qua_ ideology.

The specific tyranny of the modern regime lies in that it imposes certain substantive philosophical claims on men, without philosophical justification. Liberalism is the only system that enforces itself without even claiming to be true. It establishes the equality of all ideas, which is relativism, but has no preference for relativism over any given idea. Liberalism is the ideology of peace at all costs. But peace here means enemy occupation.

Liberalism establishes relativism, contrary to the wishes (at least initially) of the “diverse” people it claims to represent. Thus at the American Founding, the Constitution prohibited a national establishment of religion, but the Establishment Clause (“Congress shall make _no law_ respecting an establishment of religion”) also kept Congress from interfering with the states, which might establish religion to their heart’s content as far as the Constitution was concerned. The Founders assumed Protestant Christianity was common to the United States. Whether the American system was sustainable, coherent, well-founded is not the question. It was not hostile to the public expression or confession of whatever Protestant distortion of Holy Writ the people held true.

Neutrality to all religions, even atheism, in a homogeneous country, is radically unpopular. A country predominantly of one religion will wish to profess it in the public square, and perpetuate it unto posterity. Neutrality is contrary to the deepest beliefs and most determined will of nearly everyone. It is not even right to call it neutrality, but rather partisanship in favor of a tiny religious minority. America was a Christian country, and there was a brief moment when it felt that secularism was being established, in defiance of the national character, as the official religion. A school might be ninety-eight percent Christian, but prohibited from teaching the Bible or saying a prayer, because some atheist in a distant state had been hurt and sued.

But this is the great myth of liberalism. It does not impose public relativism on a people for the sake of peace, tolerance, or healthy skepticism. No one is a dogmatic liberal who believes in truth. Liberalism is relativistic on principle.

Liberalism is the regime of tolerance—nearly infinite tolerance. Of course in its early days, liberalism was not nearly so tolerant as it is now. But we have the (liberal) idea of progress, which causes people to assume that had the Founders been alive now, they would be on the cutting edge of liberalism.

Tolerance is dangerous, for it leads to intolerance. In short, one soon becomes tolerant to all but those perceived as intolerant. One may be tolerant for the perceived utility of it, or because one would not coerce anyone to do anything. Often people think of intolerance as someone with a cudgel, or the government holding a gun to someone’s head, to use that infantile metaphor propagated by conservatives. Intolerance, as we use the word, means exclusion. It means public truth. Which, granted, often implies enforceable and enforced standards.

But to go back, a person might have strong convictions. Among these strong convictions might be this—that error is a personal choice. But a regime of tolerance based on utility or pacific conviction, in the second generation becomes a regime of tolerance based on relativism proper. Anyone with convictions that have substance (as opposed to being merely legalistic or methodical) will draw a line in his tolerance. Granting this, we see that different historical societies have drawn a line in different places. But liberals renounce history as irrelevant, and propose to build something altogether new. Every society drew a line. Liberals are unique for not drawing one. They are, theoretically, absolutely tolerant.

Only someone who does not believe in truth can be absolutely tolerant. But such a person has no reason to respect the beliefs of a person who does believe in truth. After all, they are not true. If one idea is as good as another, there is no reason to respect any. Adherence to an idea deemed unpleasant or inutile is mere stubbornness, incomprehensible to the enlightened mind.

Relativists are the most intolerant of people the moment they believe in something. When they believed in nothing, they were at least kept from intolerance by a certain lethargy. Their will to power was lazy in asserting itself. But the moment they believe in something, they retain their latent intolerance, but awakened, and rush about with mad energy trying to impose it on others.

Tolerance based on relativism soon becomes intolerant. It is considered an actual moral evil to draw ethical distinctions between persons. Thus in the first generation, Christians tolerate heathens; in the second, heathens with Christian parents persecute Christians. The danger is extended into the domain of objective physical or apparent fact, with the concept of “psychological (or expressive) man.”

It is impossible to tolerate everybody. As one grows more tolerant toward the morally degraded or reprehensible, one grows less tolerant toward those perceived as intolerant; and vice versa. One who is tolerant toward everyone has no ideas; he cannot judge better from worse; therefore, he cannot act. He is barred from participating in politics, and can only indulge momentary impulses, twitching from moment to moment, before he makes the momentous plunge into death. Insofar as we live in this state (tolerating both those with and without standards), our society is rendered impotent in the face of evil, depleted of the moral capital necessary to survive, fundamentally confused, and subject to all the dangers of confusion. But anyone who has seen the sneer of a liberal against Christianity knows that these are not tolerant people. (And precisely for the reason I said: they do not believe in truth, so they do not see why other people should not give up their silly adherence to what they think is truth. It is simple for them. Consensus replaces truth. Why shouldn’t it? For one thing, because society will, inevitably, collapse.)

The best foundation for tolerance is Christian charity; for mutual respect, the Christian view of personality. These allow one to judge without enforcing every judgment on others at gun point, always with respect for human dignity. Liberal tolerance, one might have noticed, is a fickle thing.

Liberalism is susceptible to all manner of pseudo-intellectual systems because it has no fixed point of reference, is not based on truth, does not satisfy the soul, and is inconsistent. Liberalism rejects God and religion. It cannot moor itself to any fixed body of doctrine, which would allow it to maintain a healthy balance of order and freedom according to truth. It rejects God; and since utility and bohemian self-expression never satisfied anybody, people turn to some new, false religion selected out of a disintegrating society. It rejects metaphysics. For this reason it cannot draw lines properly. It has no power to distinguish. It rejects truth. Where then to define the role of the state in personal matters, of the person in public matters? When then can a person be told, “That’s ridiculous; you’re not a unicorn; snap out of it”? What can we expect of people? What is it safe to educate them into? There is no end of the difficulties. Where there is no public truth, it seems that society fractures into many pagan cults, and diversity becomes the official religion, exacerbating the problem.

Reason is only able to solve problems insofar as it discerns a system of values arranged in a proper hierarchy. But one only gets that with religion. Anything else is moral anarchy—each man for himself, and the Devil take the hindmost. Public truth fractures, and “tribalism” shows up to haunt university professors. No one knows what to believe, absent an organizing “Party” to reconcile contradictions. Nothing is self-evident anymore.

Classical liberalism failed, transmuted, failed because it is not rationally self-evident, and cannot exist on other terms.

There is no doubt traditional liberalism follows from classical liberalism. Classical liberalism was always, in practice, riddled with impurities anyway. Classical liberalism was hostile to the state, because the state at that time was an agent of inertia. The entire establishment was reactionary by liberal standards. The state then became a driving engine of liberalism. Traditional liberalism embraced it as an agent of good. Liberalism became established. Increasingly, liberals, having no higher authority to fear, use liberalism as an instrument to justify their own power, and grow rich at the expense of honest Americans who vote for them. Modern liberalism is unapologetically elitist. These are all broad strokes. An examination of all the various doctrines of liberalism (universal education, for instance) and their consequences would be interesting. I briefly refer to some of these below, but my main purpose here is broad strokes. Nor have I gone out of my way to bring into light the impurities that have bonded to liberalism, rather choosing to pick at liberalism itself.

Liberalism is inconsistent in manifold ways. Liberals have a scorched-earth concept of rights without any concept of duties (nor mechanism to generate people who will fulfill them). They would honor different interpretations of truth without believing in truth even in the abstract. They have no concept of Providence, the sacredness of being, gratitude, joy in life as such and as a diverse and unpredictable phenomenon, duty, sacrifice, anything that would allow them to justify inequality. Truth is the most basic protection of hierarchy, but they do not even believe in truth, only power. This is at its most obvious when one hears liberals blaspheme against God as a “Celestial Dictator.” Liberalism is Satanic, as I have written elsewhere. For the Serpent in the Garden likewise taught that there is no truth to sanction power, only power itself.

Since liberals do not believe in truth—do not believe truth matters—they are doomed to inconsistency, which the Devil may exploit, allowing evil to get a foot in the door. Destitute of truth a person cannot act, but since liberals must act compulsively, they rely on all manner of only partly logical constructions. Liberalism is a launching pad for insanity.

Liberals can have no objection to preferred pronouns. They may be browbeat into submission by any flagrant denial of reality. Thus, in _1984_, Winston Smith is broken by being forced to affirm, and eventually believe, even such absurd statements as 2+2=5. The only logical consequence of denying reality on such a fundamental level is humble love of Big Brother. But at least liberals, and even more conservatives, may be reduced to cringing, fawning, truckling creatures with no spine or will to resist evil.

Liberalism’s incapacity to face down Marxism has often been remarked. Marxists taps the weakness of liberalism—its “soft” weakness for human rights. Liberals fall for their promises. They infiltrate institutions by pointing out the inherent contradictions in liberalism, and between liberal principle and practice. It is a contradiction that some should not be accepted into society, that some should starve while others feast, that immigration should be restricted. Conservatives have concepts aplenty to justify immigration laws, but liberals have none. So they permit the social fabric to be torn by Marxists in disguise.

Liberals are sympathetic with the momentary agenda of Marxism. And their colossal naivete prostrates them before evil. The social optimism of liberalism causes liberals to believe the future will be one long march toward human rights. Their naivete with regard to human nature blinds them to evil. They do not see what relevance history has for us, and are doomed to repeat it with magnificent exaggeration.

During the reign of liberalism, an incredible politicization, simplification, and abstraction of thought took place. All problems are political, to be resolved by the state, the natural, logical means to their ends. Thought became simplistic and abstracted, with the myth of “economic” or “rational man.” Reason (as enlightened self-interest) is not the determining characteristic of man. To falsify human nature is to invite mass atrocity.

The history of the West since the Middle Ages has been one of liberation. The Renaissance, the Reformation, the Enlightenment—each was a blow struck at authority, tradition, and therefore God. (That is not all they were, but let us stick to our purpose.) Man liberated from the restraints of religion and ethics is, to trade in what should be conventional wisdom, helpless when faced with the reality of evil. For original sin is no myth—and becomes more sinful, and more original, as traditional restraints are removed. Both man and society lose their organizing principle.

Religion is the great organizing principle of civilization. Without it, order fragments, and society decays into many “warring tribes” as some fashionable people enjoy saying. Evil naturally arises out of division, and good is rendered impotent by relativism born of liberalism. Perhaps a “clash of civilizations” with different religions is preferable to the eternal civil wars of a godless society. Perhaps the synthesis of the Middle Ages is preferable to all.

The forces of nihilism are unleashed—but I am getting into matters that are obvious thus dealt with and well-documented. Insofar as liberal ideas have replaced Christianity, they have spelled out the death of civilization. They have drawn up the mobs of nihilistic school brats that riot and protest in the streets. Let us not be drawn into a discussion of the benefits of religion and horrors of atheism.

Modern liberals are susceptible to modern liberalism (“leftism”; which is illiberal) because they have no convictions, no philosophy, no religion. They are infinitely tolerant, and infinitely content in a state of moral indolence. They incline to nihilism, of course, with consequences for society. But most liberals we know are very gentle people. But as they have no convictions, they have not even religion, patriotism, or the barest hint of a prejudice to catch on the extremities of a hateful philosophy. Had they religion, they would be disgusted by the overt hostility to religion of their liberal peers, the most extreme progressives, government, and institutions. Had they love of country, they would be disgusted by the unpatriotic disposition of their peers. Had they a healthy aversion to socialism, they would balk at a whiff of it. Had they even a prejudice or two, they would be repelled by liberalism. For a prejudice at least is concrete. But the abstract mind of the modern liberal allows him to slide unawares into further and further extremes of evil. A prejudice is a standard that may be referred to. It catches at baloney. But liberals swallow the baloney.

We need not dwell on the economics of liberalism. Certainly city-dwellers are especially susceptible to the abstractions of liberalism, as they live in a bubble.

Liberalism, it is worth pointing out, is bad enough in its pure form. It cuts through tradition, the knot that tied everything together falls to the ground, and things list apart. Examples are too many to mention of how liberalism damages institutions, customs, modes of education that had sustained civilization. The liberal infatuation with education is itself deleterious. It results in scores of half-educated, merit-less men and women, looking to make a name for themselves, susceptible to the slightest wind of doctrine. The inculcation of liberal doctrines—and worse, progressive education—produce adults with no virtue and little knowledge, though able to read. Too many intellectuals kill civilizations. Too many aimless drifters in cities so kill. Children roiling around in public schools come out all begrimed in the hateful residue of the lowest element among them. Big families in rural areas isolated from contact with the city kids live as is best for all parties—parents, children, society.

Liberalism undermines traditional notions of community, family, masculinity and femininity, stern parenting, strict education, duty, honor—a hundred other things. Liberalism and elitism go hand in hand. The masses rarely want liberalism; so the elite are forced to revoke their democratic rights. “Enlightened” liberal elites feel very sure of themselves. G.K. Chesterton convincingly shows that the only sound basis for democracy is Christianity.

Liberal governance has disintegrative consequences in the world. As an ideology, liberalism ignores the order of things. I will not say the, but a conservative insight is that exclusive commitment to an ideology at the expense of more rigorous and real things weakens a state morally, and a morally weakened state ultimately cannot stand. Liberalism promised its own sufficiency, and as liberalism is not sufficient, liberalism was a cause of our present disintegration.

James Burnham pointed out that an ideology, at its inception, remains closely enough tied to contemporary realities to initiate meaningful reform. But the further down the line we travel, the more its policies become absurd. Ideologies are believed in defiance of reality—they are in some sense meant to replace reality rather than describe it. Thus liberalism is blind to the depredations of a foreign state, to the economic realities of the time, to the status of human rights, and so forth. In its blindness, it implements policies that are destructive, and the brunt of which its policy-makers do not feel. But this is a natural part of ideology—especially ideology unchallenged, as a liberal would affirm. Liberals believe good ideas and polices are forged in the fires of competition, but they do not apply this standard to liberalism itself. Thus liberalism grows decadent, having razed all other ideologies under the pretense of itself being neutral.

But liberalism _as liberalism_ has unfortunate consequences in the world. It is perfectly consistent with liberalism to ban or otherwise undermine school prayer, to permit the burning of the flag, and to generally attack the bases of civil society. It is a liberal myth that repression only strengthens the foe. That is when it is already too late. But there is such a thing as yielding in defeat before one has even fought the battle, indeed, before there is even a foe.

That marriage should not be protected; that morality should not be legislated; these are true liberal ideas. It is perhaps consistent with liberalism to censor the internal branch of an external illiberal threat. Thus against Marxism by some liberals in the last century. But this confirms my earlier thesis, that liberalism will defend itself from external threats as will any system, and thus is imposed on the people. Otherwise, it will soon commit suicide through its own negligence.

Liberal intellectuals have a foolproof means of escaping any difficulties that might bring on a pang of self-doubt. Their ideal world is so self-evidently good (or at least “works”) that any departure from it is not the fault of their principles. Any incidence of illiberalism is clearly a departure from liberalism, and thus liberalism cannot be blamed for it. The matter stands roughly: liberalism causes society to fall apart, when society falls apart illiberal policies are the inevitable issue. But by an inversion of logic, liberals wind up with: illiberal principles and policies are bad in themselves, and made society fall apart, the solution whereto is that we return to liberal principles. Thus they escape the necessity for self-examination and self-criticism. This in addition to the natural incapacity of any regime for self-criticism, and simultaneous tendency to grow corrupt.

There is no reason to reject liberalism outright. After all, liberal politics have been recognized as a good throughout Western history. Mass repression is not necessary. Fascism is not necessary. But liberalism as an ideology has outlived its time. We are drifting rapidly into relativism, society is disintegrating, liberalism is embodied in a regime, capable even of growing corrupt, it has fought forces of renewal and patriotism with the tooth and nail ferocity of a desperate power system, and the realities of the world require something more robust and generous to the natural inclinations of man and receptive to the light of eternal truth.

Unfortunately, we can expect liberalism to be replaced by something worse.

The conservative project, at this point, is no longer to attack liberalism as such, but to make every possible futile motion to prevent the collapse of Western Civilization and corresponding ascent of China, and a reign of evil, ugliness, and drudgery over the affairs of man such as has never been seen before. Our two mortal enemies are China and technology. It is not altogether impossible that within two hundred years (to pick an arbitrary date) everyone surviving cataclysm brought on by the triumph of matter, anarchy, power over the human spirit will be living in caves again.

Conservatives are not likely to prevent the collapse of Western Civilization. So we must hold it back for a time, bid for a temporary revival of vital spirit and good policy in America especially. Conservatives worldwide must keep the flame of hope alive in Eastern Europe. Though I am little familiar with these matters, it seems that Poland especially is under pressure from intense forces of liberalism that must be resisted. I do not know—perhaps they have already won.
